The Project Gutenberg eBook of Angelica, by Elizabeth Sanxay Holding

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Angelica

Author: Elizabeth Sanxay Holding

Release Date: August 21, 2022 [eBook #68800]

Language: English

Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             available at The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANGELICA ***





                               ANGELICA

                       ELISABETH SANXAY HOLDING




                                 _By_

                      _Elisabeth Sanxay Holding_


                               ANGELICA
                      ROSALEEN AMONG THE ARTISTS
                           INVINCIBLE MINNIE


                       _George H. Doran Company_
                              _New York_




                               ANGELICA

                                  BY
                       ELISABETH SANXAY HOLDING


                               NEW YORK

                       [Illustration: colophon]

                        GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY


                           COPYRIGHT, 1921,
                      BY ELISABETH SANXAY HOLDING


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


                                  TO

                                  G.

                      RESTLESS SEEKER FOR ROMANCE
                        IS DEDICATED THIS STORY
                            OF THE END OF A
                                ROMANCE




                               ANGELICA




PART ONE




CHAPTER ONE


Mrs. Kennedy got up from her knees, wrung out the filthy and dripping
cloth in her hands, and looked back with a sigh over the stairs she had
just cleaned.

"It’ll have to do," she said, "until to-morrow."

Then, pail in hand, she descended to the basement and pushed open with
her foot the door of her flat--three black little rooms with barred
windows on a lugubrious air-shaft, where great ash-cans stood and cats
prowled and tradesmen went whistling by with bags and bottles. A tiny
jet of gas flickered in the passage to light her as she staggered along
to the kitchen, there to set down the heavy pail with a jerk that sent a
flood of dirty water over her feet.

"Oh, Lord!" she sighed again, patiently.

She lit the gas and looked about her. There in the sink were the dishes
from breakfast; and across the tin covers of the wash-tubs scurried a
multitude of roaches, disturbed as they feasted on the crumbs there. All
this deeply disturbed her, for she was a good housewife, and a neat
little body altogether; but she knew herself to be blameless. It
couldn’t be helped.

As janitress of this Harlem apartment-house, she was permitted to live
rent free in exchange for certain services, and her honour was engaged.
She had to keep up the appearance of the place. She had to scrub the
stairs, the corridors, the vestibule, to clean the windows on the five
landings. She had also to sweep the vacant flats and display them to any
one who came to look at them.

After this was done, there was still her living to make. She did
"charing" by the day and half-day; she took home washing to be done at
night; she did all those dirty and unpleasant tasks which even the
shabby tenants of this shabby house couldn’t endure to do for
themselves. There were many days when she left her dismal little place
early in the morning and wasn’t able to re-enter it until after dark. It
gave her a feeling of terrible discouragement to come home to it like
this, all in disorder and sordid confusion. The thought of it would
haunt her all day as she worked.

It was late, as she saw by the clock, but she felt obliged to rest, just
for a minute. She sat down and closed her eyes. She couldn’t really rest
until fatigue was gone and she was refreshed; the best she might expect
was some little respite from her labour.

She was a thin little woman of limitless endurance; she could suffer
everything; but her drawn, hollow-cheeked face, her faded eyes, gave
testimony to the cost of her dreadful and heroic struggle. She was
forty, but she looked sixty. She had a blurred look, like a partially
erased drawing. She seemed literally worn out, rubbed thin, part of her
vanished.

The clock struck six, and she jumped up.

"Oh, Lord!" she sighed again. "Well, I’ll make myself a cup of tea first
thing; then I’ll run out to the corner and get a bite of something for
Angelica’s supper."

The tea did her good. She felt warmed and comforted, and a little less
reluctant to undertake more work. Then, with a shawl over her head, she
hurried out into the windy March street, to the little grocer’s on the
corner.

It was a sore temptation to linger there, where it was warm and brightly
lighted, and there were people to talk with, and the young man was so
agreeable to her. She was a favourite of his, in spite of her buying so
little, for she was a civil little woman who gave no trouble and always
had her mind made up before coming into the shop. But, with her usual
little sigh, she tore herself away, bade the young man good night, and
hurried home again.

To her eyes even Eighth Avenue, with the tawdry little shops crowded
with the very poor, or the very careless, buying their dinners at the
last instant, looked festive, looked enticing. She didn’t get out much;
she hadn’t even a window through which she could see the street. She
thought to herself that it would be nice to take a walk after supper
with Angelica, to look in the windows to see what the fruit-seller had
to offer, to view the absorbing display in the five-and-ten-cent store;
but she was quite sure that Angelica couldn’t be induced to do any such
thing. _She_ required something better than that!

It was the spur of Angelica’s requirements that drove forward the weary
Mrs. Kennedy. If she didn’t have things nice, Angelica would rearrange
and do over until she was suited. She didn’t complain much, but wasn’t
she exacting! Like a man, her mother used to say. She’d never be
satisfied with a cup of tea and some little thing you’d maybe have left
from the day before. Plenty of variety there must be, and a clean cloth,
too.

She was brisk and deft about her preparations when she got home; but she
wasn’t quite prepared when the bell rang three times, by way of
announcement only, as the door was always unlatched, and into the
kitchen came her daughter Angelica--her only child.

Angelica was not regarded by her peers as beautiful, for the quality of
her beauty was not obvious. She was looked at, stared at, fiercely
desired; she was often enough followed in the street; and yet not one of
these admirers would have called her beautiful. There was "something
about her," that was all--something not to be resisted. She herself was
only dimly aware of it. She knew well enough that she was alluring,
that she possessed some enchantment to enthrall men. She knew by some
instinct how to use her charm, but she didn’t comprehend it or
appreciate it. She regarded herself with a pleased and wondering
interest. A pale, narrow face with strange black eyes, not quite alike;
a rich, scornfully curling mouth; the mysterious, adorable languor of an
old Italian Madonna--an exciting languor, like that of a drowsy panther;
and with this curious and touching beauty went a swaggering impudence,
the speech, the gestures of a thorough gamine. Then there was her walk,
the exaggerated suppleness of her thin young body, the rakish tilt of
her broad-brimmed hat, the movement of her skirts, and a naïve
wickedness that seemed shocking, almost blasphemous, in conjunction with
that wonderful face.

And it was this air of bravado, this gamine swagger, which she fancied
was her charm. The poetry of her, the exquisite subtleness of her face,
she didn’t recognize. Her mother alone had some inexpressible and
formless idea of this. She saw something rare and heart-breaking in her
child, something that robbed her of any pretense of authority.

"Tired?" she asked her now.

"No!" said Angelica scornfully. "Bacon? That’s nice. Have it good and
crisp, mommer. No, I’m not tired--only sort of _sick_ of things."

She sat down before the table and waited, her chin on her hand, somber,
frowning, in a mood which her mother knew well and dreaded. She put the
plates on the table and stood, waiting, too nervous to eat. She could
see that Angelica had something on her mind, and there would be no peace
till she had got rid of it.

"Hurry up and eat, mommer," she said impatiently; "so we can go to the
movies after."

"I haven’t any money, deary."

"I’ll pay."

Her mother was startled. How could Angelica have money to spare on a
Thursday?

"I got paid off," said Angelica.

"_Discharged_, Angie? I thought you were doing so well----”

"Discharged nothing! I quit."

"But what in the world---- It was a good job, wasn’t it? You said it
was."

A sudden and vivid expression of disgust lit up her child’s face.

"My Gawd, mommer! I got so _sick_ of it! Sitting at that machine, all
day and every day. Those girls--and the fellers! So blame sick of it,
mommer! _I_ don’t know--I got thinking. It seems to me maybe I could do
better somewhere else."

"They’re all about the same, I guess--those factories. I can’t see what
good it’ll do you to be changing so often, Angelica. The girls are all
the same; unless maybe you could get into one of the big stores, and
they don’t pay near as much."

"What’s the good of that? Just as bad. No, mommer, I want--something
different. Oh, mommer, I want to get something _out_ of life!"

Her mother looked at her in silence. She comprehended her perfectly.
Hadn’t she been like that herself long, long ago--restless, hungry for
life, forever seeking something new? Not, of course, in this foreign and
vehement way. She had never been capable of speaking so crudely, so
violently, as her child; but though they hadn’t a feature, a gesture, an
intonation alike, they partook of the same indomitable spirit.

"_I_ know!" she said. "It’s hard--terrible hard; but it’s only worse if
you’re always fighting against it. There’s no chance for people like us,
and we’ve got to put up with it. We can’t get what we want. Whatever
kind of work you choose, it’ll be just as hard."

Angelica, her head in her hands, was looking straight before her.

"I don’t see," she began, "why I shouldn’t _try_, anyway, to go up
instead of down."

"There’s no call to go down," said her mother; "but you’ll find it hard
enough just to keep the same. You’ve got to be--well, Angelica, as my
mother used to say she’d been taught in the old country--you’ve got to
be contented to stay in the station where it has pleased God to put
you."

"God made a mistake, then. He’s put me in the wrong station, and I won’t
stay in it. And anyway, mommer, haven’t you ever thought? We’re not
staying--we’re going down, down, all the time. You’re not where your
mother was, and I’m not where you used to be."

"You’ve got more brains than me, and----”

"I’m not talking about brains. You’re _better_ than me; you talk better,
and you’ve got nicer ways. You’re----” She flushed a little. "You’re
more like a--lady than me."

Mrs. Kennedy flushed, too, but couldn’t deny it. She had before her
mind’s eye the descent of her family--how she had sunk below her
parents’ level, just as Angelica had grown up coarser and more ignorant
than herself. Unaccountably there came to her the memory of another
afternoon when she had been scrubbing stairs, like to-day, but in the
home of her girlhood; a summer afternoon, long, long ago. She remembered
that she had complained of being tired out, and her mother had bidden
her go up-stairs and lie down. And she remembered--how well!--stretching
herself out on the bed in the neat, darkened room, and her stout, kindly
mother bringing her up a cup of tea.

Her thoughts lingered with her mother, a sober Scotch-woman, living out
her life in the shelter of her own home. A nice home, too; a little
frame house in Brooklyn, comfortably furnished, modest, but not without
dignity. The suppers there, her mother, her sandy-haired, anxious little
father--assistant to a grocer--and herself, sitting at the little round
table covered with a red checked cloth, with the bland light of the lamp
on their faces--she saw it painfully, bitterly well; and her father
asking who was that young chap who had walked home from the chapel with
her, and her mother pretending to frown. They were so proud and pleased
with her prettiness and briskness, so hopeful for her!

For just a moment she passionately resented her rôle of parent, forever
giving and giving. She wanted to have one person on earth concerned with
_her_ fatigue, _her_ sorrow. She sat quite still before her little
supper, lost in her thought. Then some slight movement of her child’s
brought her back to life, and she looked up with her little sigh.

Poor, poor Angelica! Poor lovely, unhappy thing, working in a factory!
Wouldn’t that have shocked her grandparents? Wouldn’t they have been
shocked at Angelica, anyway--her swagger, her language, her point of
view! Her heart melted with pity for her child.

"I don’t blame you, Angelica," she said. "I know how hard it is to get
on with that sort; but, deary, what better can you do? One job’s as bad
as another. The thing is to do your best and trust in Providence. I’ll
do the best I can to make things happy for you here at home. We’ll have
our little treats. We’ve always been happy together, haven’t we? It’s
our lot in life to have to work hard and get very little. We’ve got to
put up with it, and just be as happy as we can."

"No, I’m not like that. I’m--no, I _won’t_!"

She wasn’t able to express her rebellion, her vehement longings, but her
mother understood her very well.

"I was just like you," she said mournfully; "restless--always after
something new--anything for a change. I wanted--the Lord knows _what_ I
wanted!"

She poured out another cup of tea.

"Eat a bit more," she said. "You’re tired and worked up like. Yes!" she
added. "I was like you, Angelica; and you can see what it did for me. I
was a nice-looking girl in those days. There was more than one young
fellow who wanted to marry me; but I wouldn’t have any of them. I
thought they weren’t good enough. I was a great one for reading books,
and my head was full of nonsense.

"Then I met your father. He was a fine-looking man, Angelica. You can’t
remember him when he was well. He was a big, handsome man, a barber. My
folks were terrible set against it, and I don’t wonder. There he was, an
I-talian, and twenty years older than me, and nothing in the world but a
barber, and a kind of a Socialist. He was always talking about killing
the rich people. I think he’d have been willing enough to do something
like that with his own hands, he used to get so worked up. He was a
queer man, Angelica. And yet, for all his talk about killing, and the
awful things he’d say against religion and churches, why, he wasn’t a
bad man. He was generous. He’d share his last penny with a friend. He
often did; we’d have to go without ourselves if one of his precious
‘comrades’ was in a tight corner. He was a smart man, too. He spent all
his spare time in the free library, reading; but that never gets you
anywhere, Angelica. He had no knack for earning money, and he never
could save. What’s more, he wasn’t fond of work. He’d rather read or
talk. He could talk all night, I do believe.

"It nearly broke my mother’s heart when I went off with Angelo. My
father, he said he’d never speak to me again, nor have my name spoken in
the house, on account of my marrying an atheist, you see. But I didn’t
seem to care. There was something about him----”

She was silent for a time, recalling her startling foreign lover, with
his caressing voice, his mandolin-playing, his anti-clerical passions,
and the brisk, pretty young girl who had been herself.

"I was terrible headstrong. I wouldn’t listen to any one. I _would_ have
him, and I did. Well, I was punished for my folly and wickedness, I can
tell you. It’s always the way when you won’t listen to your own dear
parents and those that are wiser than yourself. We never got on. From
the very day we were married--you don’t know what it’s like, Angelica.
We were always owing money. He wouldn’t hand what he made over to me,
for me to manage. I never knew where we stood. All of a sudden he’d say,
‘No more money!’ and there we’d be, without a penny. We had to live in
such a mean, poor way that I lost my health. One time we were turned out
of our rooms, out into the street, bag and baggage, with all the
neighbors looking on.

"When you were born, I’d hardly so much as a blanket to wrap you in. I
never had a bow of ribbon or a thing to dress you up pretty, like the
other little babies. And when your father took sick, there wasn’t even a
fresh sheet for him. ‘Take him off to the hospital,’ says the doctor.
‘He can’t be looked after in a place like this. He’ll die.’ ‘Very good,
I die!’ says he. ‘But I die home!’ Poor man! There he lay, so hot and
wretched, and you in a clothes-basket beside him fretting all day and
all night, so he couldn’t get any rest and peace. We’d only the one
room.

"Well, when he was taken sick, of course there was no money at all
coming in. His precious ‘comrades’ never came near him, least of all the
ones that owed him money; so I began going out by the day, and I left an
old I-talian woman to take care of you and him. Every morning, when I’d
go out, I’d feel sure and certain neither of you’d be alive and safe
when I got back. Both of you sick, and no good food or proper care! And
I’d think of her setting the place on fire, or leaving the gas turned
on. Then I’d come home, tired as a dog, and not a soul to speak to: you
a tiny little baby crying in your basket, and your poor father moaning
in his bed; everything dirty and upset. You can’t think what it was
like.

"I’m not blaming your poor father, Angelica. I’m only telling you this
to show you how those high-flown notions--where they’ll lead you. In
this world, you’ve got to be sensible, and not follow your own notions."

Not follow romance was what she meant, and what Angelica understood; for
wasn’t that what she had done? And had won it, to see it perish in a
long agony, as romance must always perish, whether won or lost. She
wanted so passionately to make it all clear to her child, to tell her
how she had seen the hard, the dull, the greedy, attain their heart’s
desire; but the romantic, the generous, never. She wanted to tell her
how hideous is the death of illusion, how merciless is the world. How
her splendid hero, black-eyed Angelo with the flashing smile, had fallen
from splendour--had, so to speak, dwindled into a miserable invalid,
duped by his friends, and deprived of all courage by the knowledge of
their treachery. How she had seen her youth go by unnoticed,
unappreciated, in that struggle for bread; of the loneliness and the
frightful indignities of poverty.

"It was a mistake," she said. "The whole thing was a big mistake!"

"I don’t know," said Angelica. "Maybe you wouldn’t have been any happier
with a different man."

"I’d certainly have been happier with enough to eat. If I’d listened to
my parents, I’d taken a sober, hard-working----”

"Bah!" cried Angelica, with the sudden fierceness that always startled
her mother. "You married the man you wanted, didn’t you? He didn’t make
any money, so you were poor. Well, what of it? You’ve--anyway you’ve got
a memory of him, to look back at, haven’t you?"

And her mother hadn’t the heart to tell her the truth--that even in
memory the ardent, enchanting lover was supplanted by the querulous and
unshaven sufferer who lay dying for months and months of some disease
which they didn’t understand, and which the busy doctor didn’t trouble
to explain to them.

"I hope you’ll be sensible, Angelica," she said.

She saw well enough that her story had made no sort of impression upon
her child. Angelica was still so young that what happened to other
people and what happened to her had no connection in her mind. She
fancied that all her experiences, as well as all her ideas, were unique.
Her mother could read in her face that she was thinking now, not of her
mother’s past, but of her own future.

"I hope you’ll be sensible," she said again. "Try to learn to be
satisfied with your lot in life. That’s how all my troubles began--being
discontented. Try to be satisfied."

"No, I shan’t," said her rebellious child. "Listen, mommer!"

"Well?"

"I was thinking. I don’t know--but I thought--maybe there’s something in
this."

She handed her mother a scrap torn from a newspaper.

     CHEERFUL young lady wanted as companion for invalid; experience
     unnecessary. Apply Thursday morning to Mrs. Russell, Buena Vista,
     Baycliff, Westchester.

"But, deary, don’t you see?" cried her mother, startled. "You don’t mean
that _you’d_ try for that?"

"Why not, mother?" demanded Angelica, flushing.

"But, deary, don’t you see? It’s--they’ll--they wouldn’t want a girl
like you."

"_Why not?_" she asked again, still more fiercely.

But her mother wouldn’t say it. Anyway, she knew that Angelica
understood her meaning perfectly.

"A waste of carfare," she said. "All that money--there’s no sense at all
in your going. There’ll be dozens after the place--girls that--that’ll
suit better."

Her object was to spare her child the humiliation she foresaw for her--a
factory girl, a bold-eyed, ignorant young thing in the cheapest sort of
clothes, offering herself to a lady as a companion! Herself brought up
in a quite different way, accustomed to recognizing, without snobbery
and without resentment, that there were in the world groups of people
better and groups worse than her own sort, she could not comprehend
Angelica’s attitude. Angelica envied without admiring. In fact, she
despised "rich people" almost as much as her father had, but her
ambition in life was to be one of them.

"I’ll risk the carfare," she said. "I’m going to try, anyway.
You know, mommer, maybe they’re sick of those silly little
dolls--‘ladies’--especially if it’s an invalid. They said ‘cheerful,’
you know."

"All ladies aren’t silly dolls," said Mrs. Kennedy, displeased. "And I
don’t know as you’re so cheerful, Angelica."

"I could be, if I wanted. Anyway, I’m going to try. I’ll just take the
fare. I’ll give you all the rest, mommer."

She took out a shabby little purse, counted her money, put some back,
and laid the rest on the tub tops. Such a pitiful sum! It hurt her
mother.

"It’s all yours," she said. "You’ve worked for it. Do as you please. If
you really want to go---- I’m sure I hope you’ll get the place."

After a moment she added:

"I hope you know, Angie, that I want you to have the best--the very best
there is. I think you deserve it. Only, deary, I don’t want you to be
disappointed; and I don’t see how you can help being. I want you to
know, deary, that I’m----”

She couldn’t think of a word. She stood anxiously frowning, looking at
the ground for a minute.

"I’m always--on your side," she ended.

Angelica sprang up from the table and seized her mother in a fierce
embrace.

"_Mamma mia!_" she whispered, as her father had taught her, long ago.

Her mother was curiously thrilled and touched. She looked up with
brimming eyes at the dark and foreign face bending above her.

"What’s that he used to say--_feeliar_, or something?" she murmured,
embarrassed. "You’re a good girl, Angelica. I hope you’ll be lucky!"




CHAPTER TWO


I

In spite of an air of complete self-assurance, Angelica was very nervous
the next morning. She lingered over her breakfast with a sort of languor
well-known to her mother, for wasn’t that, hadn’t that always been, her
air of desperation and defiance? She saw that Angelica had no idea of
changing her mind, and also that, upon thinking it over, she had
realized to some extent how daring was her project, and was frightened.

Mrs. Kennedy had to put in a day washing for one of the tenants, and was
in a hurry. She stooped over the table to print on a piece of
wrapping-paper the usual note to be pinned on her door:

    JANITRESS WILL BE FOUND IN APT. 12

Then, straightening up, she looked anxiously at her child.

"Well, deary! If you’ve made up your mind--good luck to you!"

Angelica smiled faintly. When the door had closed after her mother, she
rose herself and went into the black little bedroom, where a small jet
of gas showed her a shadowy face in a broken mirror. She put on her hat,
very carefully, and her jacket, but lingered still; until ringing across
the cement floor of the cellar came a heavy and familiar step--Oscar,
the furnace man, going out for his morning beer. That meant nine
o’clock; she _had_ to go!

Once in the street, her self-confidence returned. She was always best in
a crowd, in any position where she had to fight her way. The glances
that followed her warmed her heart, assured her of her alluring and
devilish charm. She liked it all--liked to turn with terrible scorn upon
any one who ventured to jostle her, liked to disconcert with a long,
insolent stare any man who might presume to look too long at her.

She was a child of the streets; she loved them as an Arab loves the
desert, or a sailor the sea. She had been brought up in the streets.
There, in rough games, she had learned to hold her own; there, running
the gauntlet of a mob of jeering boys, she had learned to endure
valiantly, without longing for sympathy. Her mother had always tried her
best to keep the child off the streets, but could not. On her way home
from school, whenever she was sent on an errand, Angelica would seize
the chance to linger in that violent and exciting life. And then, later,
when she was a young girl, came those curious sidewalk flirtations, so
hostile in mood, so brutally chaste. She wouldn’t stand any nonsense!

After all, her life within the house with her mother was nothing, only
interludes of rest in her vehement existence. It was out there, in the
streets, that she had become Angelica.

She had never yet traveled by railway, though she had often enough gone
to the Grand Central Terminal with girl friends and pretended, rather
pitifully, to be going on a journey. They would stand near the gateway
of a train, and say good-by, and perhaps walk forward a few steps with
the crowd. She was tremendously proud really to be going off now.

In the tunnel she took the opportunity to study her reflection in the
darkened window, and it pleased and encouraged her--the great, shadowy
eyes, the pallor of her face, the big hat framing it. It seemed to her
that she looked romantic, and not at all what she was. She began to
imagine that she might hoodwink this Mrs. Russell, that she might pass
muster even among ladies.


II

She never forgot her first sight of that house, and never afterward did
it really look otherwise to her. In rain, in snow, in summer or winter,
it was always to her as she had first seen it on that breezy spring
morning.

It was a big stone house on a wide, sunny hill, and it had somehow a
festive air, with its striped awnings, the white curtains fluttering at
open windows, and a flag flying on a pole on the summit of the hill. It
put her in mind of a picture she had seen in an old school copy of
"Ivanhoe," of a medieval castle on the day of a tournament.

She was profoundly impressed. The complacency she had felt on the train
melted away, and she began to realize how preposterous her idea was. She
entered the iron gate and began walking up the long gravel path which
led up the hill to the house, a solitary figure, with bare, sunny lawns
on either side of her, behind her the highroad where motor-cars were
spinning past, before her the august, the unknown house. Altogether an
alien world where she felt mean and pitiful in her cheap clothes, her
worn, shapeless boots.

"I _look_ like a factory girl," she reflected bitterly. "Any one would
know. Perhaps they won’t even let me in."

The maid who opened the door was certainly not encouraging. She looked
Angelica up and down.

"I don’t know whether Mrs. Russell ’ll see any more of you," she said.
"Such a crowd all morning! Come in, though."

Angelica followed her into a large hall with a polished floor, where
upon chairs ranged along the wall sat a row of women, beginning in
darkness at the farther end of the hall, and ending in sunshine near the
door, where Angelica took her seat.

She sat for some minutes in a frozen quiet, until her awe of the great
house and the severe servant and the unknown women ebbed away, and her
natural curiosity came flowing back. Then she turned her head a little
and saw them all, the whole row, staring at her. Her spine stiffened
instinctively, and she began a deliberate survey of her rivals.

The first two she couldn’t see, because they sat under the stairs in
utter darkness. Then came a portly old lady with an immense
alligator-skin bag; then a very composed, handsome woman in black. She
got no further, for the servant came hurrying back across the slippery
floor, to let in still another applicant.

Angelica now joined with the others in staring at this new one--a
blonde, superior young person, tightly corseted. She sat down next to
Angelica, and once more the line composed itself to waiting. A quarter
of an hour went by; then the old lady with the alligator bag began
whispering to her neighbor in the dark, and that started a sort of
general conversation in whispers. The information was passed along the
line that "she"--the first one, under the stairs--had been there two
hours.

"I came here before about a month ago," whispered the one before
Angelica. "She advertised, but she changed her mind and sent us all
away."

Angelica was surprised at the timidity of this person who was so
obviously a lady, if a rather faded one. It gave her courage. Being a
lady wasn’t the whole thing, then, after all. She was on the point of
answering, when once more the parlour maid hurried past, to admit an
extraordinary object.

She was a tall, bony woman of perhaps fifty, dressed in a checked coat
and riding-breeches, with a derby hat jammed down over her face and a
confusion of red hair streaming from under it. As she crossed the hall,
the last pin seemed to give way, and it all fell down about her
shoulders. She made a helpless sort of gesture to put it right, found
she couldn’t, and went on, with a long stride. Her face was overshadowed
by her hat, but there were visible a sharp nose and a pointed chin. Her
voice was unexpectedly soft and agreeable.

"Good morning!" she said. "Who’s first?"

The young blonde jumped up.

"I, please!" she said.

They were all struck dumb for a minute; then Angelica said boldly:

"You’re not!"

The lady in breeches turned her head briskly.

"Never mind!" she said pleasantly. "I’ll see you first anyway. You’ll
each have your turn; don’t worry!"

The young woman followed her into a room across the hall, and the door
was closed.

"Well, I never!" cried a voice from the darkness.

It was the woman who had waited two hours. An indignant and subdued
chorus began, which ended only when the blond young lady reappeared,
smiling falsely, and walked past them all to the front door. She had
failure written upon her face; and she knew it, and was very anxious to
be gone. But the front door would not open; she was obliged to stand
there, fumbling with the lock, raked by the eyes of those whom she had
defrauded.

"She didn’t stay long!" observed the old lady. "Well, I didn’t think
she’d suit."

"Of course not!" said another.

"Such tricks never bring any good luck," said the old lady. "After all,
there is such a thing as justice in this world, and no----”

The red-haired lady returned and opened the front door.

"Now then!" she said, beckoning to Angelica.

Angelica shook her head.

"No--I’m the last," she replied.

"It doesn’t matter about the order. Please come in."

So Angelica followed her into a dark little paneled room, where an
orange-shaded lamp glowed from the top of a piano, showing carved
chairs, a soft, dull rug, a harp, and a suit of armour that glistened
from a corner. It seemed an enchanted room, like a scene from a play, or
a dream. Angelica really didn’t worry now about getting the position; it
was worth while having come, just to have got inside of this house and
this room.

The extraordinary lady sat down upon a divan and crossed her long legs.
She had a pencil in her hand, and a little notebook, and she was most
businesslike.

"Your name?" she inquired.

"Angelica Kennedy."

It wasn’t really Angelica’s name; Kennedy was her mother’s name, but
they had both agreed that Donallotti was an impossible and unseemly
patronymic, and might cause them to be taken for _foreigners_.

"Your age?"

"Nineteen."

Angelica felt terribly at a disadvantage, standing there to be
questioned. She could hear her own voice, rather hoarse, and her vulgar
accent. She was conscious of being ungloved, of being awkward and
despised. She felt herself lost, she was in despair, she longed to run
away and be done with this misery; but the lady went on pleasantly.

"Your address?"

Her heart sank still lower as she saw written down the obscure and
sordid street.

"Could you give me any social references?"

That finished her.

"No!" she said curtly.

"Oh! Can’t you?" said the nice voice, disappointed. "What about
experience, then? What have you done?"

"You said experience was unnecessary."

"Yes, I know; but can’t you give me some sort of idea, you
know--something about yourself?"

Angelica was obstinately silent.

"What made you come? What did you think your qualifications were?" the
other asked, less pleasantly.

"I could be useful," said Angelica sullenly. "I can sew--trim hats--I
worked with a milliner once. Whatever else you wanted I could learn, and
I wouldn’t expect much pay while I was learning."

The lady interrupted her.

"How much would you expect?" she asked, with sudden interest.

"I don’t care. Just enough to help--mother. And I’m real quick to learn.
I could----”

"There isn’t anything to learn, my dear," said the red-haired one. With
an astounding change of manner, she suddenly became confidential and
garrulous. "You see, it’s for my daughter-in-law, Mrs. Geraldine. She
must have some one with her. The doctor says she’s not to be left alone.
She’s been through a dreadful experience. She lost her sweet little baby
six weeks ago. Isn’t that dreadful?"

Angelica agreed briefly that it was.

"Well, I want some one just to be about with her, you know. No work;
it’s really an ideal life. I said to my husband I’d absolutely love to
do it myself, if I had the time. She’s the dearest soul--a little
depressed now, naturally. How much would you expect?"

"What do you want to give?"

"You see, it has to come out of my own pocket. I’m doing it for her, to
make her happy. I’ll pay, but she’ll have the benefit; and of course I’m
not able to--I’ll give you twenty dollars."

"A week?"

"A month."

Angelica was quiet for a moment. It was perfectly apparent to her that
cheapness was her only asset; that if she didn’t come cheap and very
cheap, she wouldn’t be considered. She reflected, and grew more and more
convinced that here was a stepping-stone.

"All right," she said. "That’s not much pay, but I’ll take it."

"And what about references?" asked Mrs. Russell.

This was an attempt to regain a lost advantage. If she was getting
Angelica cheap, she must make her feel and see that she was cheap.

"I haven’t any."

"Oh, but you must have SOME!" said Mrs. Russell.

She was determined that Angelica should give her references, even if
they were obviously false ones. She knew she would be questioned in
regard to this, and she preferred to say that she had been deceived.
That would absolve her from blame. It would even add to her merit,
showing her to be trusting and kindly.

"The rector of your church, perhaps?" she suggested.

"Haven’t any church."

"Didn’t you say that you’d worked for a milliner?" "Wouldn’t she----”

"Not on your life! My Lord! I don’t know what she _wouldn’t_ say about
me! She hated the sight of me. Jealous! No, there’s no one; but if you
want to know more about me, you could go and see my mother."

"I might do that," said Mrs. Russell slowly. It was a good idea; she
would certainly be praised for going to all this trouble in
investigating the character of Polly’s companion. "Yes, I will. I’ll go
down to the city and fetch you to-morrow morning. And be ready for me
early, won’t you?--for I have so very little time." She went to the
door, followed by Angelica; then out into the hall, where the patient
row still sat, waiting for the turns she had promised them.

"I’m sorry," she told them, with an affable smile, "but the place is
taken. Good morning!"

They all stared at her incredulously for a moment. Then, as she held
open the front door, they got up, surged out together, and went down the
hill in a straggling parade, all so shabby in the sunlight. The one who
had been waiting so very long, in the dark under the stairs--a wan
little thing in a befeathered hat--turned upon Angelica a dreadful
look.




CHAPTER THREE


I

Angelica was ready by nine o’clock the next morning, with a bag in which
was packed every decent thing she owned. The people in the flat above
had been astounded by the sound of Mrs. Kennedy’s sewing-machine at two
o’clock in the morning, for she and her child had sat up nearly all
night, making ready. It was a melancholy, a heart-breaking work for the
poor mother. _She_ wasn’t going away. She had no adventure to excite
her, no ambition, no hope, nothing but the bitter certainty of
loneliness and poverty. She tried to be--not cheerful, for that she
never was, but calm and reasonable, while all the time she had before
her the spectre of the evening when she would come home to empty rooms,
to eat her supper alone. A groan escaped her, which she tried to turn
into a sigh.

"It’s the very, very worst that can happen to any one in this wide
world," she thought; "to be left all alone, and getting old!"

She hadn’t been able to keep her eyes from Angelica, sitting bent over a
blouse she was finishing, with her hair, just washed, hanging down her
back, wet, straight, and heavy, drying about her face in a sort of mist
of feathery tendrils.

Angelica was glad, she was delighted to go. She certainly loved her
mother, but a separation of a week, a month, a year, didn’t trouble her,
didn’t cause her a pang. She knew in theory that life is terribly
uncertain, but she didn’t really believe it. She felt sure that no
matter where she went, or how long she stayed, her mother would be there
at home, absolutely unchanged.

She was the child who has never been burnt, sitting before the glowing
fire. Having as yet never lost anything, she didn’t value anything. In
that enticing future toward which she looked, she expected to live once
more with her mother. In the meantime it didn’t matter.

"Well!" said Mrs. Kennedy. "I’ll have no one to go to the movies with
now."

"You wait!" said Angelica. "One of these days I’ll take you to a _real_
show, mommer!"

Already she saw herself the benefactor. She had forgotten, or perhaps
didn’t even know, how limitlessly she had received.

They went to bed in the early morning, and Angelica slept, while her
weary mother lay awake at her side in the narrow bed they shared. The
room was too dark for her to see anything, but she could hear the
breathing of her dear child, and with a furtive hand feel that soft,
slippery hair, still fresh and redolent of white soap.

"I’ve got to expect it!" she told herself over and over. "I’ve got to
expect it! They all go, for one reason or another. We’ve got to make up
our minds to lose everything in this world."

She got up again at six, and set to work cleaning her little flat from
end to end, so that it should be ready for Mrs. Russell’s inspection.
Angelica insisted upon helping her.

"Oh, mommer, for Gawd’s sake! I won’t get tired, and I won’t get dirty.
She won’t come before ten, anyway--prob’ly later. I bet she has her
breakfast in bed!"

"She must be a queer one," said Mrs. Kennedy, "from what you tell me."

"A freak! I wish you could have seen her--with pants on and her hair
coming down her back. And there’s something mean about her, too. I don’t
like her--telling them all they’d get their turns, and then putting them
out, that way. And look at what she’s paying me!"

"Angie, if you’re going to work for her," said Mrs. Kennedy gravely,
"you’d better hold your tongue about her. If you can take her money----”

"I only wish I had a chance to take a little more of it! I don’t see how
you’ll get along, mommer."

"Oh, I’ll manage," said her mother.

She might have mentioned that she had supported her child for many, many
years, and that even after Angelica had become a wage-earner she had
taken very little of the girl’s money--only what had to be used to
conform to Angie’s ever more and more exacting standards.


II

At ten o’clock Mrs. Russell hadn’t come yet, and Mrs. Kennedy couldn’t
wait any longer. She was obliged to go out and scrub the halls. She had
her best black silk blouse on, too, and she was dreadfully nervous about
splashing. Every half-hour or so she ran down-stairs to her child, to
see if the lady hadn’t come yet, and found Angelica scornfully waiting,
reading a magazine.

At one o’clock they sat down in the kitchen to a hurried meal of tea and
bread, ready to hide all traces of it at the first sound of the
door-bell.

"I promised Mrs. Schell I’d do her kitchen floor this afternoon," said
Mrs. Kennedy, with an anxious frown. "What do you want me to do about
it, Angie?"

"Go ahead! If she comes, I’ll run up and get you."

She spent a miserable afternoon. She scrubbed with conscientious vigour,
but with an absent mind. She thought the same thoughts over and
over--first, how disappointed Angie would be if the lady never came;
then that perhaps, after all, she wasn’t going to lose her.

"Maybe we’ll have supper together again this very night!" she would
think hopefully.

Upon the heels of her hope came the certainty that if Angelica didn’t go
away now, she would later. It was sure to come; no chance whatever that
such a girl would stop there, underground, with her.

When she came down again for the last time, at six o’clock, Angelica was
in the little parlour, now black as the pit, and she was so very still
that her mother felt disturbed. She was afraid that the poor, proud
thing was grieving, and she went in to her, noiseless in her thin old
shoes; but when she had lighted the lamp, she saw that Angelica was
sleeping, stretched out limp and childish in the big rocking-chair.

Mrs. Kennedy hurried away breathlessly to the grocer’s, to buy a little
treat; for weren’t they going to have supper together again after all?


III

It was eight o’clock when Mrs. Russell came. Finding the door unlocked,
she walked in without permission, as one is surely privileged to do in
so mean a home. They were in the kitchen, with the water running in the
sink, and they didn’t hear her come down the hall, didn’t know that she
was standing in the door, watching them.

"Well, are you ready?" she demanded.

They both turned and regarded her with just the same look--a fine
indignation, a stern surprise--Mrs. Kennedy with both hands plunged in
the dish-pan, Angelica holding a dish which she was wiping. They
resented the intrusion, and they showed it.

"Yes, I’m ready," said Angelica slowly.

She stood regarding Mrs. Russell with a steady, level gaze, not devoid
of insolence, for she knew no other way to meet the careless
condescension of that lady.

Although she was young and lovely, and in spite of Mrs. Russell’s
slovenliness and egotism, Angelica felt her own inferiority. She hadn’t
what Mrs. Russell had--Mrs. Russell standing there in a dreadful green
tweed suit, with a mannish sort of felt hat on her wild red hair, with
her great flat feet and her mechanical smile. That manner, and above
all, that voice, clear, cool, soft! Quite unconsciously, Angelica had a
profound Latin admiration for _sangfroid_. She couldn’t be coolly
self-possessed; couldn’t be anything more or less than rude.

"Get your things on, then, won’t you please?" said Mrs. Russell.

Angelica was on the point of saying that she would first finish the task
in hand, but her mother pushed her gently away.

"Go along!" she said.

There was but one course open to a proud soul. It was essential to keep
Mrs. Russell waiting as long as possible, and that Angelica did. She
could hear voices from the parlour--her mother’s, subdued and
monotonous, and Mrs. Russell’s, light, gay, and sweet. While she dawdled
before the mirror there came a new voice, shouting reproachfully through
the open front door:

"Now then, Mrs. Russell! It’s late!"

Angelica looked out and saw in their little hall a chauffeur in livery.
Mrs. Russell was also looking out.

"Very well, Courtland," she said soothingly. "Come in and get the young
lady’s luggage. Where is it, please?"

"Here!" said Angelica, pointing to a little pasteboard suitcase, painted
to look like leather.

The chauffeur regarded it in silence for a minute; then he picked it up
disdainfully, swung it in the air to emphasize its lightness, and went
out.

"Don’t be all night!" he called back.

His effrontery was amazing to Mrs. Kennedy. She couldn’t help but feel
suspicious of a lady whose servants spoke to her so disrespectfully.

Mrs. Russell, instead of being angry, seemed alarmed.

"Make haste, please!" she said. "It’s late."

She beckoned to Angelica, who followed at her heels. They went out, and
the front door closed after them.

Mrs. Kennedy sank into the rocking-chair and put her head down on her
folded arms, on the table. She had an odd and horrible sensation, such
as a fast-walking man might feel at coming suddenly up against a high
wall. She was at the end--the end of something. She was like a tired,
mercilessly driven horse whose rider has jumped off. Those twenty years
of drudgery, the struggle to "keep up a home," the debts so painfully
met, the persecutions and indignities endured, all for that girl who had
gone off with only a smile over her shoulder! She groaned--a sound which
startled even herself. It was all so wasted, so utterly done with now!

Then like a whirlwind came Angelica back again, seized the little woman
in her arms, and strained her against her thin body.

"Mommer!" she cried with a sob. "Dear, dear darling old mommer! I had to
come--just to say good-by alone. Don’t be sad, deary mommer, please!
It’s only for a little while, you know!"

"No!" said her mother’s heart. "You will never come back. I have lost
you!"




CHAPTER FOUR


I

"It can’t be the same night!" said Angelica to herself. "It can’t be
only an hour ago that I was in the kitchen at home!"

For here she was now, in a soft little nest of a room, furnished in
mahogany and dull blue, with every sort of convenience and luxury, with
a gleaming white bathroom of its own, with long mirrors, shaded lamps,
easy chairs. It amazed her. She had locked the door and got undressed,
but she couldn’t persuade herself to go to bed. Barefooted, in a sturdy
cotton night-dress her mother had made, she wandered about, examining
everything like a happy child.

Then, not for the first time, she sat down before the dressing-table and
studied her own reflection in the triple mirror--the profile with the
long, delicate nose, the narrow cheek, the soft fullness of the chin.
Then she looked straight before her, at her dark and solemn face, her
long black hair, parted in the middle, making her more than ever like a
Madonna, sorrowful, spiritual.

She was vaguely aware of the rare and exotic quality of her charm, and
she was dissatisfied with herself because her thoughts were so
incongruous. She couldn’t help wondering how much the lace bedspread
cost, and where it had been bought. She had seen furnishings like these
in the shops, and she began to compute how much the whole thing must
have cost.

"For Gawd’s sake!" she cried impatiently. "Why can’t I just enjoy it,
and not be so----”

She had no word for her meaning. She got up, and from behind the
curtains looked out upon the clear and chilly May night, down below,
across the road, over a woodland of delicate young trees, scarcely
stirring in a faint wind. That august loveliness disturbed her. She
turned away, back to the shelter of the dainty room, puzzled and angry
because she couldn’t enjoy it with simplicity; because there was
something, in the night outside--or was it within herself?--that
distressed and hurt her.

Undine waiting for a soul!


II

There was a knock at the door, and she flew across the room, alarmed.
Who knew what customs these rich people had? A little clock told her
that it was just ten; she was sure they didn’t go to bed then. She knew,
indeed, from the Sunday papers, that they turned night into day. Perhaps
they had a meal now, and she was expected to be ready for it.

"What is it?" she asked, through the closed door.

"Mrs. Russell wants you at once in her room," said a sharp voice.

So she put on her shrunken, faded little kimono and went out into the
hall. A light burned there, showing a double row of closed doors. In
what possible way was she to know Mrs. Russell’s? She was daunted; she
didn’t even know who composed the household; couldn’t imagine who might
be behind those closed doors.

There wasn’t a sound in the house. She advanced a little, and stopped
again, frowning at her own distress, her own fast-beating heart.

"I’m only doing what I’m paid to do!" she reassured herself. "If I can’t
find her, I’m a fool. I will! I’ll knock at every single door!"

She began with a firm rap on the door next her own. There was no
response, so she tried the next, and at once that agreeable voice called
out:

"Come in!"

Mrs. Russell lay in bed with her eyes closed, in a lace cap and
negligée. Her little rose-shaded lamp gave only a dim light, by which
she looked oddly young and pretty; even her tousled hair was charming.
The rest of the big room was shadowy, with here and there a glint from
glass or silver.

There was absolute silence; Mrs. Russell didn’t stir. Angelica felt
herself at a great disadvantage in her kimono, standing at the bedside,
waiting for orders. It nettled her.

"Well!" she demanded, with a boldness that surprised even herself.

But Mrs. Russell didn’t notice it, or at least didn’t appear to notice
it. She opened her eyes and smiled affably.

"I’m horribly selfish, aren’t I? But I’m such a miserable sleeper, and I
felt--won’t you read to me a bit?"

"All right!" said Angelica; but though she spoke so carelessly, she felt
suddenly quite sick. "What shall I read?"

"Here’s my book. I suppose you don’t read French, do you?"

Angelica reddened.

"Yes, of course!" she answered. "Nothing but French spoken in the
factory, you know!"

"We’ll stick to English, then," said Mrs. Russell, with just the same
smile. "And hand me my cigarette-case, won’t you?"

Angelica did so, and nervously opened the book at a marked page; but
Mrs. Russell stopped her.

"Just a minute please! I want to ask you something. I’ll have to explain
things a little. I told you, didn’t I, that I really engaged you for my
daughter-in-law? She’s in a terrible state, poor soul! She lost her
little boy. He died of pneumonia six weeks ago. Do you know, I’ve always
thought that that poor little creature caught the disease from a friend
of Polly’s, whose husband was just getting over it when she came here.
My husband insists that it’s awfully contagious, or infectious, or
whichever it is. And this woman, my dear, was so heartless about that
poor man! She said, when I asked after him, ‘Oh, nothing will _ever_
kill him!’ Did you ever? But as far as that goes, she’s never made the
slightest pretense of caring for him. But I think--don’t you?--that you
can be decent without being hypocritical. She simply tells every one
that she married him for his money, and that now she’s got it, she’s
going to spend it. Of course, I’ve known her for years, but her
husband’s more or less of a stranger--a Canadian, I think; and really
very nice--too nice, I tell her. I don’t make any pretense about it. I
simply tell her she’s a heartless little beast, and extravagant. It’s
incredible!"

Angelica was bewildered by this volubility. She saw no point in it, and
yet she couldn’t believe that any words spoken in so beautiful a voice,
and with so just and well-bred an accent, were mere nonsense. She sat
staring at the red-haired lady until she came back to her subject.

"But about Polly. She’s the dearest creature in all the world, but she’s
rather peculiar in some ways. She’s--well, exacting. She can’t see--she
wants every instant of my time. Of course I’m willing--I’m glad to be
with her; but after all, one has one’s own life, and there’s my husband.
But if ever I suggest a companion! My dear! We have the most miserable
time. She never says a word, but she lets you see....

"But I simply cannot stop in that room all day long. I’m frightfully
dependent upon exercise. If I don’t get plenty of it, I go all to
pieces. I can’t sit still there hour after hour. I’m terribly sorry
about her child, and all that, but really, what is the good in talking
and talking about it? It only upsets her. And yet, if you try to talk of
anything else, you can see she considers you cruel and unfeeling. She
simply broods over the thing. She’s so morbidly sensitive that it’s
painful to be with her. And I’m not particularly good with sick people
myself. I’m too nervous. My dear, you’ll remember all this, won’t you,
and be tactful with the poor soul?"

"When will I see her?"

"That’s the point. You see, it would never do to bring you in as a
companion. She says she couldn’t stand a hired companion, when she’s in
such a state. She doesn’t seem to understand that I’ve got to have some
sort of relief. That’s why I’m paying you out of my own pocket; but it
won’t do to let her know. That’s why I’ve given you that little
guest-room. I want to tell her you’re the daughter of an old friend, and
that you’ve come to visit me--until she gets used to you. Do you see?"

"Yes," said Angelica. "But do you think she’ll believe it?"

"Don’t worry, my dear. I understand Polly. All you’ve got to do is to
sit with her and listen to her if she wants to talk. She won’t ask you
any questions; she’s too indifferent. That’s really the trouble with the
poor girl--she’s so self-centered. She lies there, brooding. Of course,
it’s hard for her; but after all, we all have our troubles to bear. Now,
to-morrow morning I’ll take you in there and introduce you to her, and
you must----”

She stopped abruptly and yawned. It was a disconcerting habit she had,
as if her incredibly frivolous mind wore itself down by its own erratic
movements.

"Now read, won’t you?" she asked.

Angelica began, took up the book, and plunged into it, concentrating her
mind fiercely on the words alone. She had no idea what the book was
about; what she read conveyed no impression to her mind. Her sole
thought was not to expose herself, not to make mistakes, and of course
she did. There came words upon words which she couldn’t pronounce.

"What?" Mrs. Russell would ask with an amused frown, and Angelica would
have to stop and spell the word and be corrected.

For days they stayed in her head to torment her, those words, those
sounds which she repeated after Mrs. Russell. They danced before her
eyes, rang in her ears at night.

It was a horrible hour. Angelica couldn’t make any sort of
counter-attack, couldn’t assert herself, could only go on, and make
outrageous blunders, and humbly repeat the corrections.

Came a long French phrase, not one word of which she could manage. She
stopped short.

"Go on!" said Mrs. Russell.

Angelica flew at the thing, desperately and recklessly. Mrs. Russell
couldn’t stop laughing. She lay back on her pillows and covered her eyes
with her hands.

"Oh, my dear! That’s really---- You mustn’t mind my laughing, will you?"

"I don’t," said Angelica.

But she did--she hated and dreaded that laughter with all her heart. If
she had planned it carefully, Mrs. Russell couldn’t have devised a
better method for subduing her.

Yet all her recollections of this nightmare of shame and distress were
permeated by the mystic atmosphere that so enthralled her--the
rose-shaded light, the nonchalant, red-haired lady in bed, the sweet
smoke of the cigarettes; all the softness, the seclusion, the luxury,
all the amazing fascination of a dream come true--except, of course,
that she should have been in Mrs. Russell’s place.


III

"All right! Never mind! Don’t bother any more!" murmured Mrs. Russell at
last. "It’s a stupid story, anyway; and I suppose you’re getting sleepy.
If you’ll go down-stairs and fetch me another book, I’ll read myself to
sleep. There’s a package of new books Eddie brought home. Pick out
something that looks bright and jolly, will you? They’re on the table in
the library."

"I’ll have to get dressed first."

"No, you won’t. Put on my slippers and run down as you are. There’s not
a soul in the house but Polly and you and me and the servants, and
they’re all women. It’s just at the foot of the stairs."

So Angelica, shamefaced in her kimono and with her hanging hair, went
softly down the stairs. The halls were brightly lighted, but there was
no one about, and not a sound. She went into the library, which she
remembered having passed. It was fascinating to her at this hour--silent
and warm, with little glowing lamps in the corners and rows and rows of
orderly books.

On the long table in the center of the room lay the package she had been
told of. The paper was opened, and showed five or six fresh, brightly
bound books. Angelica inspected them with profound attention, for with
all her heart she desired to make an intelligent choice. At last she
picked out three, and was about to go up-stairs with them, when a voice
addressed her--a man’s voice.

"Are they for Mrs. Russell?" it said.

She started violently, dismayed at being seen by masculine eyes in such
a costume. He was standing in the doorway; evidently he had just come
in, for he carried his hat and stick. He wore a dinner-jacket, and it
was the first time Angelica had ever been spoken to by a man in a
dinner-jacket.

"Yes," she answered.

"All those books are good," he said. "I know she’ll like them all. I
picked them out for her."

She gave him a quick and stealthy look, and her heart beat faster. He
might, she thought, very well be the hero for whom she was waiting. He
was a tall, blond fellow with a little fair mustache, very
boyish-looking, very serious, not exactly handsome, but unquestionably
possessed of a certain distinction. She looked at him again, but this
time she met his eyes squarely, his shrewd gray eyes, and she saw quite
plainly that he was displeased, that he didn’t like to see girls in
kimonos in that library.

"Who are you?" he asked Angelica. "A new maid?"

"No!" she replied indignantly. "Not a maid. I’m her--I don’t know what
her name is--her companion."

He raised his eyebrows.

"I’ll take up the books," he said. "I want to speak to Mrs. Russell. You
needn’t trouble. Good night!"

He waved her out of the room ahead of him. She hurried, anxious to get
out of his sight, and went into her own room. Looking back, she saw that
he had left the door of Mrs. Russell’s room open, and she approached, to
listen, for she felt quite sure that the conversation would relate to
herself.

The young man had flung the books on the table, and was talking angrily.

"Then what did you do it for? You’ve no business to bring a girl like
that into the house!"

"She’s respectable," said Mrs. Russell.

"You don’t know. She doesn’t look it. Anyway, even if she is, she’s no
more fit to be a companion than--I don’t know what. It’s an insult to
Polly!"

"No, it isn’t. She’s a nice, cheerful girl, and she can be very useful.
She sews----”

"If you want her for a maid, call her a maid, and put her in a maid’s
room. Why did you put her there, at the end of the hall? One of the best
rooms!"

"To be near me."

"Near you? You said she was for Polly."

"That’s no reason why she shouldn’t help me now and then when I----”

"Now, look here!" interrupted the young man. "This is final. Either she
goes to-morrow, or you’ll put her in her proper place. I won’t have her
running around the house half-dressed. If she’s a maid, treat her as a
maid. If you want a companion, get one--a real one. What does Polly
say?"

"Polly hasn’t seen her yet. I engaged her. I went all the way into the
city to see her mother and find out about her. You know, Eddie, I’m
paying her out of my own pocket, because I feel that Polly shouldn’t be
left alone."

"You ought to know better than to pick out a girl like this one!" he
cried. "I’m disgusted. You’re so anxious to get rid of the trouble of
looking after Polly that you’d pick up any one, out of the street--any
one cheap!"

He was very angry; his fair face flushed; he twisted his little mustache
with a trembling hand.

"I’d like to see her----” he began again.

Angelica waited to hear no more. She rushed back to her own room and
began to dress with frantic haste.

"Well!" she said to herself. "It’s all up, now! I never thought it would
last, anyway."

At length she was dressed, shabby and dusty enough in her street
clothes, but feeling far better prepared for an encounter with the blond
young man.

"All right!" she said. "All right! Let him fire me! I don’t care. I
never pretended to be any different from what I am, anyway."

She was defiant, but she wasn’t resentful, any more than she would have
been if the boss of a factory had reproved her. She had grown up in the
consciousness that there were in the world people who had a right to get
angry and to reprove--teachers, policemen, bosses, rich people.

There was a knock at the door, and a voice informed her sharply that
Mrs. Russell was waiting for her. To her surprise and relief she found
Mrs. Russell alone, and yawning.

"I suppose we’ll have to go to bed now," she said. "It’s after twelve;
so I’ll say good night to you."

"Good night," Angelica answered.

She supposed that she was to be allowed to leave the room; but she had
quite half an hour’s work still to do. She had to brush and braid Mrs.
Russell’s short, curly hair; she had to go down-stairs again and fetch a
bottle of spring water from the ice-chest; she had to put away dozens of
things, and then to set out on the table lip-salve, cold cream, and some
sort of medicine; and then to pull up the blinds, put out the light, and
grope her way out in the dark.

She was in the habit of going to bed very much earlier; yet, once more
in her own room, she didn’t feel at all sleepy. She lay stretched out on
the bed, with her hands clasped under her head, meditating about Mrs.
Russell, who was altogether outside her experience, and the blond young
man with the little mustache. She wondered who he was.

"Her son, I guess," she reflected. "Anyway, he’s pretty cross to her. I
wouldn’t put up with it, if I was her. One of these rich young fellers,
he is, and as spoiled as can be!"

Then she didn’t think about him any more; he was no longer the possible
hero of her romance. He was so obviously not for her. Her beauty, her
impudence, would never impress him. Her mind dwelt for an instant with a
sort of shadowy regret upon his nice young face; then the current of her
thought changed, and ran back into the channel it had made for
itself--that of speculating upon her own future.

"My first night in this house!" she said. "I wonder what’s going to
happen to me here?"

She couldn’t invent or imagine anything. Certainly she couldn’t even
dimly foresee the truth.




CHAPTER FIVE


I

Angelica awoke early the next morning and dressed quickly, determined to
be ready before Mrs. Russell could possibly send for her. She needn’t
have hurried; she waited from half-past six until half-past eight
without hearing a sound. Time after time she opened her door and stepped
out into the hall, to find it always empty and silent.

Finally she could tolerate it no longer, she was so much afraid that
something was expected of her, that she was betraying her awful
ignorance of rich people’s habits. She decided to go down-stairs, find a
servant, and make diplomatic inquiries about the daily procedure.

As she was going along the hall, who should come out of his room,
directly in her path, but the blond young man.

"Er--good morning," he said, with a slight frown.

"Good morning!" Angelica answered, and in her desperation added: "Say,
would you mind telling me, when does _she_ get up?"

"Ten o’clock--somewhere about then. You’d better come and have your
breakfast with me now. I’d like to have a little talk with you."

She followed him with a great assumption of carelessness--which,
unfortunately, there was no one to see--down the stairs and into a
little screened porch, where a willow table was laid. She was impressed
by what she saw, but not astonished, for she was prepared for the utmost
luxury. In fact, she couldn’t have been astonished, no matter what she
had seen, so greatly did the marvels of which she had read in the Sunday
papers exceed any possible reality.

On the table stood a copper coffee percolator, shining in the sun like
gold, and steaming softly; a nickel chafing-dish, bright as silver;
cut-glass cream-jugs and sugar-bowls like diamonds; and a cloth of
hemstitched linen. There were little willow chairs with chintz cushions
drawn up before each place, and sweet fresh flowers. She was in no way
disappointed.

She sat down opposite the young man, resolved to do exactly as he did.
He unfolded an immense napkin, then picked up the morning paper, and for
a few minutes studied the Wall Street news intently. Then, as the
servant entered, he laid the paper down and sat immovable while she drew
him a steaming cup of coffee, prepared it, and put before him a
cantaloupe cut into halves and filled with ice.

"Bring this young lady’s breakfast, if you please," he said, frowning
again.

"Now, then, miss--what is your name?" he asked Angelica, when the maid
had left the room.

"Kennedy--Angelica Kennedy."

"Miss Kennedy, I was speaking to my mother about you last night. I felt
that it wasn’t at all the thing to--for her to have engaged you as a
companion. You’re not qualified. It’s not fair to Mrs. Geraldine, and
it’s not fair to you. You couldn’t fill such a position."

He spoke with decision, with authority, but not in the least unkindly.
He spoke in the manner which his business training had given him; and
Angelica accepted it in the manner she had learned from her factory
experience. He was arbitrary and supreme; useless for her to complain,
to resent. She didn’t even trouble to think whether he was just or not;
simply, she was "fired."

"All right," she said, without emotion.

"Now," he said, "if you wish to remain in another capacity--if you wish
to be Mrs. Russell’s maid----”

"No, I don’t."

"That’s for you to decide, of course; but it’s a pleasant, easy
position, and the pay is better."

"I’m not thinking so much about pay. I could have got plenty of jobs
that would have paid twice as much as this. Only----”

"Why did you want this?" he asked, with interest.

"Well, I thought I’d----” Her dark face flushed. "I want to learn--nice
ways. I want to get on. I don’t want to be--like I am, all my life."

"You’re perfectly right!" he said, looking at her. "I’m glad to see
you’re ambitious; but why choose this sort of way to get on? Why don’t
you try to get into a good office?"

She shook her head.

"No! It wouldn’t do me a bit of good to get ahead in business if
I--didn’t have nice ways. No! I watched the papers a long time for
something I could have a try at, and then I saw Mrs. Russell’s ad, with
‘experience unnecessary.’ I knew I wasn’t the kind of girl that they
want for a companion, but I thought if I could show ’em that I could be
more useful than any one else, I might stand a chance."

He was silent for a time, while the servant reentered with a cantaloupe
for Angelica and porridge for him. Then he looked up and studied her
face.

"I think--if I’d understood the case better, perhaps----” he said. "But,
anyway, why don’t you stay as my mother’s maid? There’s no use having a
silly pride about such things. There always has to be a beginning."

"No!" she said again. "There’s no sense in that. If I can’t be--oh,
right in the family, kind of, it won’t help me. I’ll go. I couldn’t
stand being a servant."

He didn’t say any more, but continued his breakfast with hearty
appetite, and with a dexterity which she found herself quite unable to
copy. At last he had finished, and pushed back his chair.

"I’ve been thinking," he said. "You’re evidently out of the ordinary. I
don’t see why you shouldn’t be given a chance--if you’re really anxious
to improve yourself." He rose. "I’ll speak to Mrs. Geraldine this
evening, when I get home," he said. "If she agrees, you shall stay. Good
morning!"

He went out abruptly, leaving Angelica alone at the table. She jumped up
in a violent hurry, before the servant could return and find her
defenseless, and went out into the hall. She had no idea where to go,
what to do; she was bewildered and rather miserable. The young man
hadn’t made any effort to spare her feelings. Suggesting that she should
be a servant!

"He’s got a nerve, all right!" she said to herself, but half-heartedly.

Really she thought that he was right in all that he had said, and that,
in spite of his uncompromising frankness, he had been friendly. She
liked him.

"But _she’s_ different," she reflected. "I won’t let _her_ trample all
over me!"

She recalled the previous evening with burning shame. Those French
words! She felt that Mrs. Russell had been unfair and unkind, and she
went up-stairs, to find her, with deep reluctance. She was determined
not to be meek and not to be frightened.

"You’ve got to act like you were somebody!" she said to herself. "You’ve
got to show ’em you won’t stand any of their nonsense. People take you
at your own valuation!"

That was a favorite phrase of hers. She had read it often, and it quite
fell in with her cheap and pitiful philosophy. It was true enough, too,
among the people she knew--people who weren’t capable of judging or
analyzing a fellow being. She herself took others at their own
valuation, because of an unconscious conviction that she was incapable
of making an original appraisement.

So, resolutely looking as if she were somebody, she knocked at Mrs.
Russell’s door.

"Come in!" said that suave and charming voice, and she entered.

She had expected to find Mrs. Russell still in bed, lazy and
fascinating, and she was more or less surprised at finding her up and
dressed, and scribbling away at a little desk. All her charm had
vanished. She looked quite her five and fifty years; she was bony,
sallow, horribly untidy in a green sweater and a short plaid skirt that
showed her knoblike ankles and her great feet. It was rather surprising
to see her hair coming down so early in the morning, a coil of it
slipping out under her jaunty little hat. It gave her a most unpleasant,
haglike look.

"Golf this morning!" she cried cheerfully. "Damn these letters! They’ll
have to wait. Now, my dear, I’ll take you to Polly, because I’m in a
hurry to be off. Mind what you say, won’t you? She’s so exacting! Make
friends with her and stay near her. I’ve absolutely got to be gone all
day--I’ve promised so many people at the Country Club, and I’ve got to
get in a lot of practice before the big match. It’s a wonderful game,
but it makes a perfect slave of you. It’s so fatally easy to lose your
form. I take it so seriously. I worry myself ill over it. Come on!"

Angelica came after her slowly. She didn’t know whether she ought to say
anything about her talk with the blond young man--whether he expected
her to do so. Before she had decided, Mrs. Russell was knocking on a
half-open door, and a voice bade them come in.

Angelica had had a preconceived idea that this daughter-in-law would be
young and beautiful, a pampered darling. She was somewhat taken aback by
the reality. There was a woman lying in bed, reading a newspaper, which
she politely put down when they entered--a woman of forty, dark, sallow,
with heavy eyes. She was apathetic and weary, but she was not dull;
there was a quiet intelligence in her glance; she was indifferent
without being uninterested. She was like a very tired but pleased
spectator at a play. There was a charm about her lassitude, a lingering
handsomeness which she made no effort to retain.

"Good morning!" she said, with a smile.

"Good morning, Polly! Did you have a good night? I don’t believe you
did, you poor soul! I couldn’t get you out of my mind. I couldn’t sleep,
thinking about you. I would have come in, half a dozen times, only that
I was afraid of disturbing you, if you _had_ dropped off. And it worried
me so to think that I had to leave you to-day! But it couldn’t be
helped. I’ve absolutely got to go to the dentist."

"Like that?" asked Polly, glancing at the other’s costume.

"My dear, of course not! I just put these on to do a little gardening. I
was up so early; I thought I’d look after your beloved plants a bit."

"Now, why does she tell such lies?" thought Angelica. "Can’t she see
that that woman doesn’t believe her?"

"You’re going out again, then?" asked Polly, with just a shade of
reproachfulness in her voice.

"My dear, I’m obliged to go to the dentist’s----”

"You won’t be home to lunch, then, I suppose?"

"But you shan’t be alone!" cried Mrs. Russell brightly. "I’ve got Miss
Kennedy here--the daughter of an old, old friend of mine!"

And then began a new series of the most preposterous lies, flowing in a
bland, untroubled stream. She said that Angelica’s father was a
clergyman living in the country, and that Angelica was going to be
married, and that her mother had sent her to stop with Mrs. Russell
while she bought her trousseau. She added a great deal of the grossest
flattery about Polly’s superior taste.

"I advise you to consult her in everything!" she ended, turning to the
astounded Angelica. "Now, then, I’ve got to fly. You two must have a
nice, comfy chat!"

And she whimpered to Angelica as she went out:

"Just till she gets used to you, you know. Then we can tell her!"


II

Polly lay back on her pillows, looking at Angelica. She didn’t ask her
to sit down. Angelica returned her gaze resentfully and miserably,
ashamed of her preposterous position, but quite helpless, having no idea
how to extricate herself. She didn’t feel able to say bluntly that Mrs.
Russell’s story was a lie, although she could see that Polly was
suspicious--more than suspicious--and she was certain that she could not
sustain any sort of examination.

"When did you come?" inquired Polly.

"Last night."

"Alone?"

"No; she brought me."

"Mrs. Russell, you mean? And she says she was a school friend of your
mother’s. I wonder what school!"

"I don’t know."

"Does she often visit your mother?"

"No."

"Then, as a matter of fact, you don’t know her very well?"

"Never saw her till the day before yesterday."

Polly smiled.

"Aren’t you afraid you’ll feel rather strange here? How long do you
expect to stay?"

"I don’t know."

"You don’t know? I’ve forgotten--where did Mrs. Russell say you lived?"

"In New York."

"That’s odd--very odd! I certainly understood her to say you lived in
the country."

Angelica was dumb.

"Where in New York? I know the city so well."

"At the Ritz," said Angelica boldly.

She was quite desperate now. She was sure that Polly saw through her,
and that it was only a matter of time before she was shamefully exposed.

"At the Ritz!" exclaimed Polly.

Their eyes met in a long and hostile look.

"Yes, at the Ritz," Angelica repeated.

"Why do you tell me that?" asked Polly quietly.

Angelica’s swarthy face grew scarlet.

"You needn’t think this was my idea!" she cried. "I don’t try to pass
myself off as--some one different. She hired me, and I told her all
about myself. My mother’s a janitress, and I worked in a factory!"

Polly’s face had flushed, too.

"What was the idea in trying to make you my companion?" she asked. "Did
Mrs. Russell imagine I shouldn’t know the difference? Or perhaps she
thought any one was good enough for me!"

Angelica was a hardy young devil, but this was too much even for her.

"I’m not--just any one," she muttered, with a quivering lip. "I’m
not--dirt. I’m----”

"My dear child!" cried Polly, in sudden compunction. "Of course not! I
didn’t mean to offend you in any way. I’ve nothing against you
personally; it’s simply that I don’t want a companion at all. I--I can’t
endure the idea of a person who is paid to amuse me--a stranger, who
doesn’t know anything about me or the child I lost!"

She waited a moment, then she went on.

"I’m very sorry. It’s an awkward situation for both of us. Mrs. Russell
has done it before. You see, the doctor said I was not to be left
alone--all nonsense, but Mr. Eddie took it very much to heart, and he
wants Mrs. Russell to stay with me. Naturally she finds it irksome, shut
up in the house. If I can’t have a familiar face, then I’d rather be
alone. I’m sorry, but it’s no use your wasting your time, my dear. You
might be looking for something else." She held out her hand with a
kindly smile. "Good-by!" she said.

Angelica didn’t move.

"I saw that Mr. Eddie," she said; "and he said he was going to speak to
you about me. He said he’d keep me if you would."

"But what has he got to do with it?" asked Polly, smiling.

"Well, at first he thought I wouldn’t do; and then, after he thought it
over, he said: ‘Well, I’ll agree if _she_ will.’"

Polly was silent, perplexed to know how to get rid of this tenacious
young creature. Angelica seized the opportunity.

"Well," she said, "I’m sorry I came, bothering you; but as long as I’m
here, hadn’t I better stay till she gets home again? I’m better than
nobody!"


III

It was the longest day Angelica had ever spent. She didn’t go out of the
room; even lunch was brought to them there. She sat, answering whenever
she was spoken to, but for the most part silent, looking out of the
window at the country landscape, which held nothing to interest her
gamine eye, and watching the clock. She couldn’t believe that something
wouldn’t happen.

She tried, in her very crude way, to study Polly, but she had no
success. She watched her lying for long stretches of time with her eyes
closed, whether asleep or awake it was impossible to divine. Her face in
repose was profoundly mournful, and, unrelieved by the fine black eyes,
looked older and more worn. Her mouth had a kindly line, but it was the
disillusioned, cynical kindness of one who expects no gratitude.

"I suppose she’s Mr. Eddie’s wife," reflected Angelica. "Well, she’s
certainly a lot older than he is--ten years, I’d say. I wonder why they
call her Mrs. Geraldine, when her name’s Polly!"

This detail puzzled her greatly. She fancied it must be some custom of
rich people. Perhaps Polly was a nickname for Geraldine among them. It
didn’t occur to her that it was a surname; she took it for granted that
Polly was young Mrs. Russell.

Little by little, as always, her thoughts drifted off to her own future.

"I wonder how it’ll be when I’m married? Anyway, I bet you’d never catch
me moping around like she does! If I was rich like her, and got sick,
I’d have lots of flowers, and friends coming in all the time--everything
nice and pretty and bright; and a trained nurse, too, I guess."

It must be admitted that Angelica had little sympathy. She had a certain
amount of facile generosity. She had moods when she was willing to do a
great deal for any one she liked; but it was impossible for her to put
herself in the place of another, to compassionate any pain which she had
not actually felt herself. Losing a baby seemed to her a grief of small
significance. She had seen very little of babies, and wasn’t interested
in them. To her, at nineteen, the only comprehensible sorrow was that of
losing a lover.

She regarded Polly with irritation. She was rich, not too old, not too
bad-looking; why didn’t she try to throw off this lethargy of grief and
take some advantage of her opportunities? The life of a rich person, as
seen by Angelica, was a very fantasy of gaiety. It might be gaiety
covering a broken heart, if you wished, but always gaiety. The proper
course for such as Polly would be to plunge into a whirlpool of
excitement, and just reveal, from time to time, by a shadow stealing
over her face, that her heart was broken. No, decidedly she could not
comprehend this woman lying there with closed eyes, brooding over her
immeasurable loss.

Polly, however, through her greater sophistication and experience, and
through her native shrewdness, found Angelica no puzzle. Now and then
she asked her a well-calculated question, and she soon learned that
Angelica had apparently spent all her nineteen years in learning, quite
unconsciously, whatever would be useful in a lady’s service. She had
spent innumerable Saturday afternoons sauntering through the big shops
with girl friends, until her mind was richly stored with information.
She knew just which place was best for any given article. She had
compared styles and prices, and, with the amazing discernment of her
sort, she had even distinguished among the various grades of customers.
She knew who the really best people were, where they went for things,
what they wanted, and what they paid. She knew things one wouldn’t have
imagined her knowing--smart, out-of-the-way little shops for perfumes,
for sweets, for lingerie.

Of equal or perhaps superior value was her deftness. She could manicure,
she could dress hair; she had picked up, God knows how or where, an
almost professional knowledge of make-up. She could sew, she could
embroider, she could quite marvelously trim hats. She told all this to
Polly, because she wanted to convince her of her usefulness. And she
did.

Long before the afternoon was over, Polly had made up her mind that this
girl would be valuable and likewise agreeable. She liked her, liked her
lovely face and her husky, oddly touching voice, liked the character
which she so ingenuously displayed. Here was a girl passionately anxious
to please, yet without servility, who was at once ignorant and
intelligent; one whom she could command, yet on whom she could lean.

However, she didn’t show any such approval. Who would, indeed, toward a
person being employed?


IV

The light had all faded out of the sky, and the big room was nearly
dark. To Angelica, who never sat still, who was not formed for
meditation, it was depressing to remain there in the deepening twilight,
with no idea how much longer this wretchedness would endure. Polly
didn’t stir; all the house was still.

Her imprisonment was terminated by the sudden entrance of Mr. Eddie.

"Light the lamp!" he cried sharply. "You’re an idiot, Polly, to sit here
in the dark like this! You--Miss What’s-Your-Name--you mustn’t let her.
It’s very bad for her. Try to keep her cheerful."

He had turned a switch as he spoke, and five electric lights had flashed
on, making the room as brilliant as a stage. He looked anxiously at
Polly.

"Eating better?" he asked. "I’ve brought you some oysters--something
rather special. Are you coming down?"

"Not to-night, Eddie, thank you; but I’ll enjoy the oysters. Is your
mother home yet?"

"No. I shan’t wait for her. I told Annie an early dinner. Half-past six
sharp, miss! I’ve brought home a lot of work to do."

He went out again, with a curt nod at Angelica.

"You’d better get ready," said Polly. "He’s not very patient. He doesn’t
like to be kept waiting."

"I am ready," said Angelica. "I haven’t any better clothes to put on."

She had risen, and was standing near the door. She knew that Polly
wished her to go, but still she lingered, miserable but resolute.

"Did I do all right to-day?" she blurted out.

Polly opened her eyes.

"Why, certainly, my dear," she said. "Would you mind putting out all the
lights but one?"

"But doesn’t he want it cheerful?"

"I think it ’ll be more cheerful that way," Polly answered, with a faint
smile. "Now, then--thank you! I think I’ll rest until dinner-time."

"But were you satisfied with me?" insisted Angelica.

"Of course I was."

"Well, do you want me to stay? Because he’s coming to talk it over with
you. Will you tell him that you want me?"

"Yes," said Polly. "I do want you--very much!"




CHAPTER SIX


I

Angelica was very nervous about having dinner with Mr. Eddie. He was
obviously fastidious and hard to please, and she hadn’t the vaguest idea
what his standards might be. She did what she could with her appearance;
she washed her hands and face and brushed her hair, and then, having no
watch or clock to advise her, went down-stairs.

She hadn’t been in the dining-room before, and she stopped, profoundly
impressed, in the doorway. It was so exactly the dining-room she had
expected--the grand, stately dining-room of the cinema drama, with
paneled walls and sideboard loaded with plate, the opulently set table,
the high-backed chairs, the flowers all about, the very air of dignity
and richness.

There was the essential butler, too. She felt sure that the man bending
over the sideboard was a butler; busy, no doubt, with work about which
she was quite ignorant. She drew near to ask him the time, and was
surprised to see him stuffing cigars into his pocket from three or four
boxes that lay in a drawer. She didn’t know whether this was proper,
whether it was part of a butler’s proper functions; but when she saw the
man’s face, and observed his stealthy and hurried manner, she grew
certain that he was stealing. One of those society thieves of whom she
had read!

He was in evening dress, and he had some sort of perfume about him. He
was a slender little man with neat, snow-white hair and a dapper white
mustache. His face was bland, with a long upper lip that gave it a
humorous look, and intelligent blue eyes.

He turned suddenly and saw her.

"Well!" he cried. "Upon my word! And who are _you_?"

"That’s my business," said Angelica.

This was her idea of a non-committal answer. She could not decide
whether he was a servant, a member of the family, or merely an outside
thief who had dropped in, and she was anxious to make no avoidable
mistakes.

"Of course it is!" he replied, cheerfully. "No doubt I’ll learn in the
course of time. But perhaps you’ll enlighten me as to your status?"

She didn’t understand him, and she scowled.

"Perhaps you’ll tell me what you’re doing here?" he inquired.

"Well, what are _you_ doing here?" she returned.

"Waiting," he answered imperturbably. "Waiting for dinner and Mr.
Eddie."

"Oh, him! Well, he’s in. I saw him up-stairs."

"But do, for pity’s sake, tell me who you are! We don’t take pretty
girls wandering about this house as a matter of course. You’re quite a
startling vision, you know."

She didn’t like his airy gallantry; but she was sure now that he wasn’t
an outside thief or a servant, and that he must therefore be a member of
the family, entitled to answers for questions.

"I’m _her_ companion," she said.

"Aha! And what is your name, if you please?"

"It’s Kennedy."

"Oh! Scotch, are you? You don’t look Scotch. You look like a French
girl, I should say--one of these dark, passionate creatures...."

"All right!" she interrupted, scowling more heavily. "That’ll do about
me. What’s the time?"

He pulled out his watch.

"Six-thirty. Do you dine with us, Miss Kennedy? I hope so. I feel----”

Just then Eddie came in, also in a dinner-jacket and incredibly
neat--the very model of a correct young man. He bowed ceremoniously, if
somewhat severely, to Angelica.

"Good evening, doctor!" he said to the white-haired man.

He touched an electric bell with his foot. The parlour maid came
hastening in.

"I said half-past six!" said Mr. Eddie.

"Yes, sir, I know; but cook----”

"No excuses! You can certainly get some sort of dinner ready for me when
I ask for it. Now hurry up! Never mind about what’s ready and what
isn’t; just bring me _something_ at once."

He pulled out a chair for Angelica, and they all sat down in silence.

"Good Lord!" said Eddie suddenly. "What a life! I’m tired as a dog, and
I’ve got to work all evening."

"Too bad!" said the doctor. "Anything I could do, my boy?"

"No, thanks."

There was silence again. The soup had come in, and Mr. Eddie gave it his
undivided attention. He ate with amazing rapidity, one course after the
other, and he expected to be served without an instant’s delay. Neither
the doctor nor Angelica had ever finished when he had, and their plates
were always whisked away with choice and coveted morsels on them. There
was no sort of conversation--nothing more than Mr. Eddie muttering, with
his mouth full, "All right, Annie!" and having one plate replaced by
another.

But this was as Angelica liked it. She didn’t wish to talk or to be
talked to; she wanted to sit at that table, with two men in evening
dress, to contemplate the silver and china and linen, and to reflect
with amazed delight upon her situation. A dream fulfilled!

Cautiously she surveyed her two companions--Mr. Eddie, looking rather
harassed, and as oblivious of her as if she were invisible to him, and
the dapper little white-haired man, whose eye often met hers with a
glance stealthy and curious. She decided that he must be Polly’s
physician, and a man who must be given no leeway. She had seen his kind,
standing outside stage entrances, with walking-stick and boutonnière and
a smirk, or on corners where working girls passed on their way home.

Instantly he had finished, Mr. Eddie got up and went over to the
sideboard, from the drawer of which he took the three rifled boxes. He
didn’t seem to notice that they had been tampered with, but passed two
to the doctor.

"Help yourself," he said. "I got these from a chap who imports them for
private consumption. Put a couple in your pocket. They’re good."

The doctor helped himself modestly from both boxes, and sniffed at them.

"Ah!" he said. "I can tell! My boy, you can afford to indulge yourself;
you’re one of the lucky ones."

"Yes," said Eddie. "Nothing but luck, of course!"

"I didn’t mean to disparage you," cried the doctor. "No one appreciates
what you’ve done, and how hard you’ve worked, better than I. Just a
little joke, Eddie!" He pushed back his chair and rose. "I’ll have to
run out and fetch your mother home from the club," he said. "_Au
revoir!_"

Mr. Eddie followed him so quickly that before she knew it Angelica found
herself left alone at the table. She, too, hastened out of the room and
up-stairs, and in a sort of panic knocked at Polly’s door.

"Who is it?" inquired Polly’s voice, languidly.

"Angelica!" she answered, forgetting, and hastily added: "Kennedy."

"I don’t need anything this evening, thank you. Good night!"

She turned away, completely at a loss. It was only half-past seven,
hours before bedtime. What was she to do?

She went into her room. It was as charming and comfortable as she had
remembered it, but it offered no prospect of amusement. She didn’t know
whether she ought to go into the library or any of the rooms
down-stairs. She wanted to, but she had a dread of being spoken to by a
servant.

"Well, I’ll take a walk, then," she said. "No one can say a word against
that!"

She put on her jacket and her rakish big black hat, and went sauntering
down the hall. She had to pass the open door of a room, and in it she
saw Mr. Eddie, writing. He saw her, too.

"Hello!" he cried. "Where are you going?"

"Out for a walk."

"Better not. It’s dark and lonely around here."

Angelica had paused.

"I’ve got to do something," she said.

"Sit down and read," he said, rather impatiently.

"I don’t like to read."

"Nonsense! Here, come in! Sit down! I’ll give you something you’ll
like."

But she hesitated. His bedroom! Surely he didn’t expect her to go in
there?

He did, though.

"Come in! Come in!" he cried, and she obeyed.

She couldn’t really believe that there was anything evil or dangerous
about this worried young man sitting before a desk covered with papers.
He tapped the back of a big armchair.

"Better take off your hat," he said. "It keeps off all the light."

She turned over the pages of the book he gave her, pleased to see that
it had a great many pictures, and began dutifully to read. In spite of
herself she became interested.

It was the third volume of a series, "Magnificent Women of the Past,"
and it contained sketches of the lives of the Empress Josephine, Mme. du
Barry, Mme. de Montespan, Mary Stuart, Lady Hamilton, and many others.
It was sensational, impossible stuff; but Angelica was neither a
well-informed nor a discriminating reader. She was enthralled by this
description of courts, of gallantry, of balls, fêtes, and levées, of
kings, emperors, and princes; above all, by the radiant women who ruled
over this amazing world.

She went on, page after page, stopping only to study the portraits of
the dazzling beauties. She had never imagined anything like this. Of
course, she had studied what was called history in the public school,
but that was entirely concerned with battles and treaties; not a word of
woman, except, very rarely, an entirely respectable heroine. She had
thought of kings and queens as rather dull and solemn persons, also
concerned with battles and treaties. She had never conceived of such a
passionate and colourful and exciting life as was revealed in this book.
It was a life unfortunately impossible in this actual world.

She came to the end of the life of Mme. de Montespan as imagined by the
author, and closed the book, the better to reflect upon it. She sighed;
she was disturbed by dim longings for an existence of this sort. She was
full of dissatisfaction and preposterous ambitions. She was so immersed
in the scenes of court life and in the pictures her imagination created
that it was almost a shock to see Mr. Eddie sitting there in front of
her, still working.

She stared at him thoughtfully. A nice-looking boy--perhaps something
more than that. His face was boyish, but in no way weak; the features
were all good, fine, firm, regular. She fancied--still dreaming of what
she had been reading--that he looked like a young prince, that there was
something in his brow, in his presence, that was noble.

Her glance wandered round his room. It was austere, handsome,
immaculately neat. She liked it; it was manly.

Her roving attention had distracted Mr. Eddie. He looked up, frowned,
and leaned back in his chair.

"Well?" he asked.

"It’s a nice book. I like it."

"That’s right. I’m very glad. Take it with you and finish it. It’ll do
you good."

"How can it?"

He ran his fingers through his hair and surveyed her thoughtfully.

"In the first place," he said, "it’s a very good thing to read history.
I read a great deal of it--lives of famous men, and so on. In the second
place, it’ll give you some idea of what a woman can do."

"Yes, I know; only they’re all bad women," said Angelica, with
simplicity.

Eddie flushed.

"Yes, but--everything was different in those days. They didn’t have our
opportunities. Anyway, in some of the other volumes there are plenty of
women who weren’t bad--Romans, and so on. What I meant is that it shows
you what an influence a woman can have if she tries."

"I guess they didn’t have to try."

"Of course they did. They wanted to be powerful. They wanted to be
magnificent. There aren’t any women like that now--no more magnificent
women."

He fell silent, to think for a time of his mother, of Polly, of the
clerks in his office, of girls he had danced with, of girls on the
stage, of all his limited feminine acquaintance. Not a vestige of
magnificence!


II

He was a queer chap, was Eddie. Born of a selfish and frivolous mother
and a morosely indifferent father, neglected, left in the care of
servants of the sort that always collect about an extravagant and
careless mistress, he had never acquired as a matter of course those
ideals which the average boy of his class takes for granted. He had a
perfectly natural inclination toward truth, honour, and justice, and
toward clean living, but he had had to discover these virtues
laboriously, all alone. In consequence, he gave them a sort of perverted
importance. He became somewhat of a prig.

And having with such difficulty discovered his truths, he was inclined
to be a bit domineering and intolerant about them. He was angry and
disappointed at finding any one imperfect.

What is more, he was for the first time in his life finding himself a
person of some importance. Always before he had been under a
disadvantage, always conscious of his "queerness," of having a mother
who was a laughing-stock and a father who was a scandal. He was priggish
and unsociable, but he wasn’t a scholar. He had done very badly in all
the various schools to which he had been sent by fits and starts; and
when at last he had been somehow got into college, he had done still
worse. He had hated his failure there; he had so longed to be popular
and friendly, and had been so markedly neither.

So he had gone into business at nineteen, and he had found himself at
once. He did amazingly well. He had a clever, sympathetic, imaginative
brain, he had good judgment, he knew how to handle his people, how to
deal with men; but at the same time he had not very much common sense.

He was like one of those musical infant prodigies, so shamelessly
exploited by their families. He had this amazing talent for making
money, and the people about him, well aware of his virtue and his
innocence, had known perfectly how to make use of his ability. He was a
cruelly driven slave to his exalted idea of family obligations.

Eddie wasn’t aware of it, however. He was willing to spend all his youth
in acquiring money for other people to spend. He took a sort of pride in
exhausting himself. He was young enough and strong enough to enjoy
affronting his health. It seemed to him a noble thing to support one’s
family. This was one of his pet ideas--ideas which he had got from books
or from other people’s talk, none of which had developed quietly and
wholesomely from childhood, or from experience. His instincts were sound
and admirable. He practically never had a base impulse; but his ideas
were grotesque. He was, in some respects, a fool, and he was treated as
fools must always be treated by the self-seeking.

There was truth in Angelica’s fancy. There was something in this boy
that was what men chose to call kingly--a generosity, a fine force, a
self-forgetfulness, a profound sense of his obligations, even toward
this waif, so recently brought to his attention. He believed it his duty
to help her.

"Why don’t you go into business?" he asked her abruptly.

"Why?"

"I think you’d do well. You seem level-headed. And there’d be some sort
of future in it, instead of pottering about here like an old woman."

"But I don’t like business. I like to be here, with nice people, where I
can learn something."

"That’s quite right, of course; but what will you do--later?"

"Well--I don’t know, exactly. I just think that if I can--sort of
improve myself--some sort of chance will come some day."

She reflected a moment.

"All these magnificent women," she said. "They just kind of waited round
for something to turn up, didn’t they? I mean, they didn’t plan what
they were going to be. I haven’t thought it all out; but I mean to--oh,
to go _up_ all the time, to get to be somebody!"

Eddie, unconscious of his own infantile innocence, smiled at her
naïveness, but admired her.

"I’ll see that you get a chance," he said. "And I’ll help you to learn,
if you like. If you’ll study, I’ll give you what spare time I can."

"All right," said Angelica. "That’ll be fine! Only," she added, "what I
want isn’t exactly things you study out of books. It’s--good manners,
and the right way of talking."

"You’ll pick up all that from Mrs. Geraldine," returned Eddie. "You
couldn’t find a better model. By the way, how did you get on with her
to-day?"

"I guess she liked me. She said she wanted me to stay."

"That’s good!" he cried, very much pleased. "If Polly’ll take an
interest in you, you’ll be absolutely all right. She’s a splendid
woman."

"But she’s so much _older_ than you!" thought Angelica. "It’s so queer!"

"Yes," he went on, "Polly’s one of the best. Of course she’s not herself
now, losing the little chap. He was nearly two years old, and a fine
little fellow. Poor girl! She was wrapped up in him. We all were, for
that matter."

Angelica was puzzled.

"But," she said, "don’t you----”

"Don’t I what?"

"I mean--it must be nearly as bad for you as for her."

"_What?_ Why, there’s no comparison between a son and a nephew."

"For Gawd’s sake! Wasn’t he your son?"

"Of course not! My dear girl, you didn’t think I was Polly’s husband,
did you?"

"Yes, I did," she faltered.

"I’m her brother-in-law. She’s my brother’s wife."

"Oh! She’s a widow, then?"

"No, no, no! He’s alive. He’s here, in this house; but he’s a poet, you
know, and when he’s working he shuts himself up for days at a time. He’s
a queer chap--a regular genius."

"That’s pretty hard on his wife, I should say."

"That’s what the wife of a fellow like Vincent must expect. He is a bit
trying, but you have to make allowances. He’s very remarkable--writes
beautiful stuff."

"I don’t like po’try," said Angelica, who had already taken a dislike to
this brother.

"I’m not very fond of it, either, but I admire it."

"I don’t," she persisted.

"You shouldn’t say that. It’s childish. Every one admires poetry."

She maintained an obstinate silence. Eddie was rather at a loss. He
believed that every one ought to admire poets; he faithfully endeavored
to do so, and had made himself believe that he had succeeded. He felt
that his brother was a genius, accountable to no one, and not to be
blamed for faults which seemed to Eddie peculiarly disgusting and
unmanly; but he didn’t know how to make Angelica admire his brother.
Even the fact of Vincent’s genius was by no means established, and could
not be demonstrated to an outsider, for he had never published anything
yet, nor attempted to do so.

"He’s a very interesting chap," Eddie said. "Very!"

"Well, I’m glad he’s not my husband," said Angelica. "Shutting himself
up like that--wouldn’t suit _me_!"

Eddie frowned.

"I should think it was a privilege to be the wife of--of a genius."

Again Angelica was silent.

"Of course," said Eddie, "I don’t pretend to understand him. We’ve never
seen much of each other. He lived with my father and I lived with my
mother. He was brought up differently--a Roman Catholic, for one thing;
then he went to an English university for a year or two, and he’s
traveled. Very well-educated chap; altogether different from me. A
scholar, and very artistic."

"What does he do for a living?" Angelica asked.

"He’s just beginning his career," said Eddie. "It is very hard to get
started with that sort of thing."

Angelica’s silence was eloquent.

"Then who’s this feller you call ‘doctor’?" she asked abruptly. "Does he
live here?"

"That’s Dr. Russell, my mother’s second husband."

"Oh, I see! I had you all mixed up. But whose house is this--his?"

"No. It’s mine."

"Yours? Do they all live here with you?"

"Certainly," he said, reddening and frowning. "I want them to. I don’t
want to live alone--no social life."

Poor devil! He was conscious of something ridiculous in his position,
and yet he was proud of it. There weren’t many fellows of his age who
could have done this. It had meant taking fearful risks, of course, and
working without rest, but the worst of it was over now. He was really
prominent in his world; he was a sort of financial prodigy, admired and
watched. He called himself, on his office door, a stock-broker. He was
on the road to becoming a millionaire; he had made up his mind to do it,
and there was nothing to stop him.

"Well," said Angelica, "you’re awful good to them."

Again he frowned. They had both grown suddenly ill at ease, at a loss
for words. Angelica got up.

"Good night!" she said abruptly. It was her way of terminating an
awkward moment.

"Good night!" Eddie answered, rather absent-mindedly.

With her volume of "Magnificent Women" tucked under her arm, Angelica
went back into her own room.

"He’s a fool," she said to herself, "keeping all those people; but there
_is_ something about him. I don’t know--I guess he’s kind of magnificent
himself."




CHAPTER SEVEN


I

Sharp at ten o’clock the next morning Angelica knocked at Polly’s door.
Her eyes were dancing, she was filled with an exhilarating sense of
mischief, for she had been having breakfast with the doctor, and a
regular rowdy breakfast it had been--the old delightful badinage of the
street and the factory.

When she had come down the dining-room was deserted, and she had
lingered about waiting for any one who might come. Presently, in had
come the dapper little doctor. His face had lighted up marvelously when
he saw her there alone; and he had told her archly that she was welcome
as the flowers in the spring.

"That’s all right!" Angelica had retorted, belligerently. "Never you
mind about me!"

And so the conversation had proceeded, flowery compliments on his side
and a continuous show of resentment on hers--all as it should be.

"You’re a regular old devil!" she had told him. "You ought to be ashamed
of yourself!"

"You’re a devil yourself!" he had answered. "A young devil, and a
dangerous one, too. You could teach me a trick or two, I dare say!"

Then she had thrown a piece of bread at him, and he had sprung up and
smothered her in a napkin, almost upsetting her chair backward, and she
had given his necktie a terrific pull. She did so like this sort of
thing!

She had a familiar and delightful feeling now toward Polly, such as she
had so often felt toward teachers at school and foremen in
factories--that she had something up her sleeve, that she was slyly
outraging authority.

"Come in!" said Polly.

She was still in bed, her breakfast, untouched, on a tray beside her.
She looked stale, broken, weary in body and in spirit, miserably
inferior to the sparkling girl who stood waiting for her orders.

"Good morning! Sit down," she said, politely enough.

She could say nothing further. Weary from a sleepless night, sick with
grief and longing, lonely as a traveler stranded on a desolate shore, it
seemed to her impossible to communicate with any one about her. She
could think of no words that they would comprehend, no answer from them
that would give her any possible solace.

She seemed to Angelica a sallow, listless woman of forty, who persisted
very selfishly in staring out of the window and preserving a tedious
silence. She had no faintest idea of that anguish of a fine and strong
soul.

"Would you mind----” said Polly, suddenly. "There’s a little leather
book in my desk, and a fountain pen. I’d like to write a little."

Angelica jumped up and brought them to her with alacrity. She felt very
obliging this morning.

"Anything else I can do?" she asked cheerfully.

"No, thanks. It’s my diary. It’s just seven weeks ago that my child
died."

She spoke quietly, but her face had assumed an odd, drawn look.

"Oh, Lord!" thought Angelica. "Now I suppose there’ll be a scene. And me
feeling so happy!"

But there was no ‘scene,’ not even a tear. Polly had long ago got past
that consolation. She put down her little book.

"Will you go and ask Mrs. Russell, please, when she wants to use the
car? I think I’ll go out this afternoon."

Angelica sped off, glad to be released from this terrible ennui, and
knocked upon Mrs. Russell’s door. She found her engaged in a surprising
occupation. She was carefully rouging her cheeks--that tough,
weather-beaten, brown skin!

Her hair was carefully dressed, and she wore a handsome embroidered
white linen frock. She was tall and straight, with good shoulders and a
fine, free play of limb. From the back she wasn’t bad, she looked like a
muscular and athletic young woman until she turned and one saw her face.
With the rouge and the blackened eyebrows, it had an indescribably
repulsive look of dissipation; it was as if a man had rouged and
bedecked himself.

"Well!" she said. "How do I look?"

"All right," said Angelica dubiously.

"Tell me frankly if there’s the least thing. I must be very nice to-day.
We’re giving a lunch to a young English woman, a tennis champion, and
I’m on the reception committee. Do I _really_ look nice?"

"Yes," said Angelica, in a still more doubtful tone.

"You don’t think so!" cried Mrs. Russell. "I can see that! But, my dear,
I don’t suppose a woman of my age ever can look very nice."

However, the glance she gave to her reflection in the mirror was quite a
complacent one. She began covering her face with pink powder, while she
talked; and grimacing as she carefully avoided the blackened eyebrows.

"How did you get on with Mrs. Geraldine?" she asked.

"All right; she’s not so bad," said Angelica. "Only sort of dopey."

"‘Dopey’? What’s that?"

Angelica flushed.

"Oh, like people that take dope--morphine and opium and all that."

"But my _dear_ girl, Polly doesn’t----”

"I _know_. I only said she acted like people that do. It’s just a word
people use about any one that’s quiet and----”

"Mrs. Geraldine’s very reserved--quite different from me. I’m obliged to
say everything that comes into my head. But I dare say her life has made
her like that."

"Why has it? What kind of life has she had?" asked Angelica, with naked
curiosity.

"My dear, you see, she was married before to a perfectly dreadful sort
of man. He drank, and I don’t know what else--absolutely no good at all.
You see, she used to be a concert singer when she was young. It’s very
interesting to hear her tell about her days in Germany, when she studied
there. And then she came back to New York and got an engagement to sing
in one of the first-class restaurants. She really comes from a _nice_
family--Ohio people--not in society at all, but _nice_. They weren’t at
all well off, so I suppose they were glad to have her earning her own
living. Anyway, they were away off in Ohio, so they couldn’t have
stopped her very well, could they?"

"No," said Angelica, astounded at the very idea of the melancholy Mrs.
Geraldine singing in a restaurant.

"She must have been quite a pretty girl," Mrs. Russell went on. "I’ve
seen pictures of her. She says she had the most distressing experiences
with men, following her, and so on. She says she was really just about
to give up the restaurant singing when one night this tremendously
handsome man was waiting for her when she came out. She says he was so
different from the usual sort--so gentlemanly, and so on; and _he’d_
been so impressed with _her_. My dear, have I too much powder on?"

"Yes, on your forehead. Who was this feller--the handsome one?"

Mrs. Russell stared at her in perplexity. Then she suddenly recollected
the subject of their talk.

"Oh, yes, of course! He told her afterward that he was so much impressed
with her refinement and distinction. I suppose she did look well,
standing up on the platform in a white dress. And her voice is charming.
He walked home with her that night and they were married three weeks
later. Of course, as she says, she didn’t really know him at all; and he
turned out to be perfectly dreadful. She went through the greatest
misery with him. He was killed in an accident; he was in a taxi with
some chorus-girl. I don’t really know much about him; she doesn’t like
to talk about him, but I’ve seen a picture of him. He _was_ handsome,
but coarse, I think. He was quite successful in his business, whatever
it was, but he spent all he made, and only left her a tiny little
income. She made it do, though, she lived so quietly."

Angelica was delighted to get all this information. She leaned against
the doorway in one of her careless, beautiful gamine attitudes, her dark
eyes on Mrs. Russell’s face with an attention that pleased that veteran
gossip.

"She’s a charming woman. Still, I was amazed at Vincent, of all people!
She’s so much older than he--years, and she shows it. Of course, when
they were first married three years ago, she was quite different--much
nicer-looking. Poor soul! She really had a wretched time with Vincent.
He’s frightfully trying. I really think she’s been wonderfully patient
with him. I’ll never forget the day he came into my room and told me he
was married. I couldn’t believe it; he’s so fickle and erratic. I never
expected him to settle down. I don’t suppose he really has. And when I
saw her--simply a plainly dressed woman of thirty-five! Of course, she
has a certain sort of charm about her; she’s _restful_. I like being
with her--but not all the time. I can’t understand why she clings to me
so. She’s so self-reliant."

How indeed was Mrs. Russell to understand all this? She with her
thistledown heart, her life of infantile amusement-seeking, to
understand the solitude of this woman from a small town, accustomed to
the friendly faces of neighbors, of people who had known her all her
life and were interested in all that concerned her; this woman who had
twice given her love with simplicity and generosity, to have it twice
despised, a wife without a husband, a mother bereft of her child? Polly
hadn’t a soul near her who took the least interest in her, _no one to
talk to_. That was what made her so silent. She didn’t, she couldn’t
utter flippancies; she longed for one of her own good, earnest, kindly
small-town women, who would wish to listen and know how to console.

And in default of this, then she must have Mrs. Russell, who could at
least talk about her lost child. She could say to her, "Do you remember
this day and that day, this that he said, and how he looked?"

She had loved her child with a passion tiresome to all those about her.
She had been absorbed in him; she had seen in this little boy not alone
her only child, but her only friend, a fellow countryman in a hostile
land. And now he was gone.

"She’s charming," Mrs. Russell repeated; "but I should never have picked
her out for Vincent. She’s not the sort of woman to hold him. He’s so
odd, you know. He always used to say that he’d never marry, and that he
was looking for the perfect woman, whatever he fancied a perfect woman
was. I don’t know what it was he saw in Polly. She’s not beautiful, or
fascinating, as far as I can see. Of course, there’s her voice. It’s
lovely, but still---- He met her at some sort of tea, he told me, and he
said that he was enchanted by the sight of her, sitting there in her
plain dark blue suit, with her hands folded, so quiet and clever, you
know, in comparison with all the other women. I must admit I was
disappointed."

She paused for a few minutes, to rub her big square nails with pink
paste. When she began to talk again, she had unaccountably changed her
point of view. Instead of her bland contempt for Polly, she had,
somehow, within her queer soul developed a great indignation against her
son.

"He has behaved abominably," she said, with a frown. "I can’t understand
him. For days at a time he doesn’t speak to her; doesn’t even see her.
And all for nothing! He took her up in a caprice, and he’s dropped her
in another caprice. Do you know, my dear, all the time their child was
so ill, he wouldn’t see it? He said he could do nothing to help it, and
he couldn’t bear to look at suffering. And at last, when it died, the
thing became so scandalous that Eddie had to go and actually force him
to come into its room. So he came sauntering in, and what do you think
he said? ‘Thank God I really hadn’t had time to grow attached to it
yet.’"

"That was pretty bad," said Angelica. But she was more curious than
shocked; she was eager to hear more about this atrocious Vincent.

"And now," went on Mrs. Russell, "whenever the poor soul begins to
practise, he comes stamping out of his room and shouts down the stairs,
‘Stop! Stop! For God’s sake, stop!’"

"He must be pretty selfish!"

"Selfish! That’s not the word. He squeezes every one dry. He bothered me
a while ago until I sold one of my rings to get money for him; and as
soon as I’d handed him the money he walked out of the room without even
saying, ‘Thank you.’ And when I tried to speak to him, he didn’t even
stop; just called back to me, ‘I’m not in the mood for your conversation
to-day. I couldn’t endure it.’ He’s a devil!"

"A devil!" thought Angelica. "I wish I could get at him! I bet I could
handle him! I’d like to see him, anyway. I’d devil him! And maybe if he
had a wife with more fight in her, more spirit, he’d be different. He’d
be different to _me_!" her secret heart cried. "No man could ever
neglect or hurt _me_. No man could ever really win me. I shall be loved,
adored, obeyed, but I shall not give much. I am Angelica, the beautiful,
the proud, the free!"

She was very ready to hear more, but that was not to be. The aggrieved
voice of Courtland, the chauffeur, was heard in the hall.

"Now, then, do you want to be late?" he called. That reminded Angelica
of her errand.

"Oh! Mrs. Geraldine said to ask you when did you want to use the car.
She thought she’d go out."

Mrs. Russell stared at her in distress.

"Oh, pshaw! I never imagined she’d want it. Tell her, please, I’ll send
Courtland back with it in an hour."

"I don’t think!" said Courtland. "She better not hold her breath
waiting."

Even Angelica was aware that this was not the proper way for a chauffeur
to address his lady. She was surprised that he wasn’t rebuked. She
looked at him with an indignant glance, which he returned with one of
the greatest scorn.

"Wait in the car, Courtland," was all that Mrs. Russell said. "I’ll be
down directly."

"He’s a nice boy," she told Angelica, after he had gone. "I think a
great deal of him. I’m sorry for him. He’s very bright and intelligent,
but he hasn’t had any opportunities."

"He’s mighty fresh," said Angelica.

"You mean disrespectful? I know it; but it seems to me that in this
country, you know--a republic--we should expect that sort of thing.
We’re all more or less equals, I suppose, aren’t we?"

Angelica said yes; but she didn’t think so, and she knew that Mrs.
Russell didn’t think so. A game of exploitation, simply but in a country
where every one had the pleasing possibility of becoming one of the
exploiters.

Angelica went back to Polly with the message.

"She says she’ll send back the car in an hour."

"Then I think I’ll get up and dress," said Polly. "We’ll run into the
city for lunch. Do you know, I feel better! I think you’re doing me
good."

She really believed so; it seemed to her that the fierce and careless
vitality of this girl charged all the atmosphere, penetrated and
invigorated even her jaded and sorrowful heart. It was not the sort of
vitality that fatigues and irritates, like the ceaseless activities of a
little child. Angelica was quiet, for the most part; she didn’t speak
much, she sat quietly in her chair, with the sort of cool steadiness
that one notices in cats. When you spoke to her, it required no effort
for her to attend, to concentrate her thought on you; at once her dark
face was alert, her ready mind in action.

With Polly--although she wasn’t aware of it--her manner was exactly what
was needed. She was generally quite indifferent, thinking her own
thoughts, absorbed in her own affairs; but she was instantly willing to
perform any service, or to talk, or to listen.

"Mr. Eddie spoke to me about you," Polly went on. "I have a very high
opinion of his judgment, and he seems to think you’re just the person
for me."

Angelica was delighted.

"Well," she said, in her pitifully ungracious way, "it’s kind o’ hard,
not knowing your ways or anything; but I guess I’ll be useful."

Polly smiled.

"Help me to get ready, won’t you? I haven’t been out for such a long
time; and the doctor seems to think I should."

"This doctor, is it? _Her_ husband?"

"Oh, no! He’s not exactly a doctor. He invented a patent medicine,
called Dr. Russell’s Old-Time Rejuvenator. That’s why they call him
doctor."

"I see! But those things are mostly fakes, aren’t they?"

Polly didn’t answer.

Angelica enjoyed helping her to dress. She liked to open bureau drawers
and wardrobes and see the well-ordered and dainty things, all faintly
fragrant. She liked fetching the silk stockings, the fine little
handkerchiefs, the gloves, all the accessories of a woman of excellent
taste and a decent income. Very plain, Polly’s things were, but with a
most refined and fastidious plainness. Angelica, seeing and handling
them, gained a quite new idea of a lady’s requirements.


II

"And there we sat," she told her mother later, "all the morning, like a
couple of fools, waiting for the car. It got to be lunch-time, and still
it hadn’t showed up. I couldn’t help feeling sorry for her, waiting
there with her hat on and all. ‘I guess she’s decided to keep her
automobile for herself to-day,’ I said. ‘It isn’t hers,’ she said. ‘It’s
Mr. Eddie’s, for us both to use.’ He’s a generous feller, I think."

The excursion was given up. They had lunch down-stairs together, and in
the afternoon they went out for a little walk--a tiresome walk for them
both. Polly said scarcely a word. Angelica believed her to be angry, and
at five o’clock, when at length the motor came back, with Mrs. Russell
in it, she looked forward to a row.

She received another lesson, for Polly said nothing. She had tea in the
library with her mother-in-law, and she was as agreeable and polite as
if nothing at all had occurred to vex her.

At first this conduct appeared to Angelica cowardly and shockingly
hypocritical; but as she watched Polly, she changed her opinion. No, it
wasn’t hypocrisy; she didn’t pretend to be pleased and friendly. Her
attitude said to Mrs. Russell, in effect:

"Do as you please. You can’t annoy me. I remain absolutely undisturbed."

And as Angelica observed them, first to see how tea was to be drunk, and
later to ponder, a new idea struggled to life in her mind. It began to
dawn upon her that there were grades among ladies, and varieties. Mrs.
Russell was a lady, and Mrs. Geraldine was a lady; but they were of
quite different sorts, and Polly’s sort was the better.

So there wasn’t simply a set of rules to follow, or a definite standard
to attain. There wasn’t even one absolutely correct manner. How was one
to learn? How was one to imitate?

"My Gawd!" she reflected. "There’s more to this than I thought!"




CHAPTER EIGHT


Perhaps, if Polly had imagined that she was serving as a model, or even
that she was being shrewdly observed by Angelica, she would not have
done what she did. She would have maintained the aristocratic
imperturbability that had so impressed her companion, and she would have
concealed her malice. For Polly had malice--that agreeable feminine
malice, so much more attractive than a forgiving heart. She had a quiet
relish for vengeance, and a long, long memory for affronts.

For three years there had been war between herself and her
mother-in-law, in which Polly had had to struggle desperately to avoid
extermination. The ruthless selfishness of Mrs. Russell would have
destroyed her, would have made her an instrument to serve her in her
pleasure-hunt. She was not to be reasoned with, she was too heedless and
indifferent to weigh consequences, too insolent to be hurt by defeat,
too slippery for any sort of compromise. Polly had adopted a policy of
implacability toward her. She let nothing slip, forgave nothing, forgot
nothing.

They were all at the dinner-table that evening--Eddie in evening dress,
and the doctor also, in order to please his punctilious and severe
son-in-law. Polly was an altogether pleasant object for contemplation in
a brown voile frock, while Mrs. Russell had come forth in an astounding
thing of orange and blue. It was shockingly expensive, very unbecoming,
and badly put on. Taken with her straggling hair and a pair of dusty and
shapeless black velvet slippers, it formed an exterior not likely to
enlist her son’s support in the coming encounter.

"Eddie!" said Polly. "What was that man’s name--the one we had for the
day when the car was broken? Do you remember? He was such a good,
careful driver, and his car was so nice and clean!"

"Why do you want to know?" asked Eddie suspiciously.

"I thought to-day I should have liked to get him."

"What’s the matter with Courtland and your own car?" Eddie persisted
sharply.

"But it’s not my own car, Eddie."

"Where was it?"

"It was in use. I can’t expect to have it _all_ the time," she said
sweetly.

"You haven’t been out for seven or eight weeks, have you?" he demanded.

"No; but still----”

"That’s not exactly ‘all the time’!" His face had flushed. "Did you have
the car, mother?" he asked.

"Yes," she answered with perfect indifference.

"Now look here!" he said. "Can’t you arrange better? Can’t you talk with
Polly in the morning and find out what she intends to do?"

"Oh, Eddie, it doesn’t matter!" cried Polly in distress.

Eddie saw the distress and grew more angry. Angelica saw it also, and
understood it.

"It seems to me," he said, "that when Polly goes out so seldom, she
might have the benefit of her own car. She’s not well--you must remember
that."

Mrs. Russell was smiling her mechanical smile.

"She shall have the car," she said, "whenever she wants it. If I’d known
to-day, I shouldn’t have taken it."

"I meant to ask Angelica to ask you," said Polly.

"I did ask her, too," said Angelica.

"No," said Mrs. Russell, still smiling. "You didn’t. You forgot, I
suppose."

"Were you out in it all day, then?" demanded Eddie.

"My dear boy, I was. And now, if you please, we won’t have any more of
this. You can do your scolding in private. Polly shall have the car all
the time. Tommy!" she said, turning to her husband. "Who do you think I
had lunch with at the Country Club but Horace and Julie Naylor? Poor
Horace! She is such a dreadful, vulgar little minx! And yet she’s so
amusing. I must have her down here again."

"Not when I’m home," said Eddie. "I think she’s disgusting."

"Pretty little woman, though," said the doctor.

"Plenty of _them_!" said Eddie.

Mrs. Russell had got away from the subject of the motor-car, and rested
satisfied. It was a question with Angelica whether, after all, she
hadn’t triumphed. It was a drawn battle, at the best.

But before the evening was over the combatants were obliged to forget
their hostility and to ally themselves against their common tyrant. All
very well for them to quarrel together, but they didn’t forget that
Eddie was the source of all good, and that, to placate him, all private
feuds must be ignored.

They were still sitting at the table when a telegram arrived, which
Eddie opened and read with a frown.

"Confound it!" he said. "Here’s a nice row! Vincent’s getting a bit
_too_ bad. This really puts me in a very awkward position. I gave him a
letter to give to a man, and apparently he never did. I’ll have to get
hold of him now, and find out what he did do with it."

He rose from the table, and so did Polly and Mrs. Russell.

"What’s the matter?" cried Polly, with an anxiety that seemed to
Angelica extreme. "What has Vincent done?"

"I gave him a letter to deliver to a man who was leaving for San
Francisco--an important letter; and now the fellow telegraphs that he’s
reached there, and that the letter hasn’t reached him yet. He should
have got it a week ago, before he left.

"But don’t bother Vincent to-night!" implored his mother. "You can’t do
anything now. Wait till morning!"

"Why shouldn’t I bother him? He’s bothered me enough! I’m not going to
humour him in this damn fool idea of shutting himself up like a----
He’ll have to behave like a human being!"

Polly laid a soothing hand on his arm.

"Do wait till the morning, Eddie," she said. "You know it’s at night
that he does his best work, and it seems a pity to disturb him."

"What about it’s being a pity to disturb me while I’m eating my dinner,
to try and rectify one of his beastly, inexcusable blunders? No, by
Jove, I’m entitled to _some_ consideration! He’s got to come out and
tell me what he did."

"Do wait!" cried Polly.

He looked at her in anger and distress.

"Don’t you _understand_?" he demanded. "It’s important. I’ve got to find
out what he’s done with my letter. I’ve got to know at once--even," he
added with irony, "at the risk of disturbing Vincent. I haven’t seen him
for three days."

"Oh, do wait!" cried Mrs. Russell.

"I won’t!" he answered.

Striding out of the room, he began to run up-stairs. To Angelica’s great
amusement, the two women followed him. She followed, too, of course.

"Oh, Eddie!" implored Mrs. Russell. "Don’t be so headstrong! Wait! I’m
sure he’s asleep."

"He can wake up, then. It’s only eight o’clock."

"Or maybe he’s working, and if you interrupt him he’ll be so vexed!"

"_He_ vexed!" cried Eddie, outraged. "It seems to me that I’m the one to
be vexed!"

Proceeding at once to his brother’s room, he knocked at the door,
waited, and then knocked again.

"Vincent!" he called. "Open the door! I want to speak to you!"

He knocked louder and louder. Polly again touched his arm.

"Eddie!" she said, in a low voice. "You’re making a dreadful noise. Why
_don’t_ you wait? To please me!"

"It can’t really matter," said Mrs. Russell. "You couldn’t really do
much at this time of night."

"No," said Eddie. "I could have waited, but now I won’t. There’s
something damned queer about it. He can’t help hearing this row."

"But you know how peculiar he is," said Mrs. Russell. "He wouldn’t
answer if he didn’t feel like it."

"I’ll make him. I won’t put up with this!"

He had turned away and was starting down-stairs.

"Where are you going?" called his mother.

"I’m going to get Courtland, to help me break in the door!"

Mrs. Russell drew near Polly.

"What do you think we’d better do?" she whispered.

"I don’t know," Polly answered in distress. "Even if he would wait till
the morning, I don’t see just what we could do. Perhaps we’d better----”

Mrs. Russell nodded.

Eddie returned promptly, bringing with him the blond young chauffeur,
pleased and alert.

"Which door?" he asked. "This? All right! Now, then, all together!
One----”

"No!" cried Mrs. Russell. "No, Eddie. Wait a minute!"

He did wait, but impatiently, while she hesitated. Finally she said to
him in a half whisper:

"Eddie, _he’s not there_!"

"Not there?" he shouted.

"Do hush! No; he’s been away for three days."

"Why the devil didn’t you tell me?"

"Because I didn’t want to upset you."

"Did Polly know?"

"Yes; she----”

"And you both stood there and let me make a fool of myself?"

"I couldn’t bear to upset you, Eddie, and neither could Polly."

"And you let me knock and call and bring up Courtland. Oh, by Jove, it’s
_too_ much!"

"I’m very sorry," said Polly gently.

Eddie didn’t even look at her.

"I’m sick of this!" he cried. "Sick of being made a fool of like this.
It’s always the way in this house; every hand’s against me. Nothing but
deceit and trickery!"

"Eddie!" said Polly firmly. "You forget yourself!"

The poor chap, recalled by her tone to his standard of propriety--the
very fount of his exploitation--became a little quieter.

"No," he said, "I don’t. Where did he go?"

"To New York," said Mrs. Russell. "He had a bag with him. Courtland
drove him in."

Eddie turned suddenly upon Courtland.

"Why didn’t you tell me he wasn’t there?" he demanded.

"How did I know he hadn’t come back?" retorted Courtland, smartly.

"Where did you leave him?"

"Corner of Broadway and Forty-Second Street," said Courtland, and, with
his unquenchable impudence, he added: "But you won’t find him there
now!"

"That’ll do," said Eddie. "You can go. And don’t gossip about this."

Courtland wheeled about briskly and began, quite leisurely to descend
the stairs, whistling cheerfully and loudly before he was well out of
sight. Eddie did not even appear irritated. He had turned toward the two
ladies of his household with an ominous look in his blue eyes.

Eddie was incredibly generous, he was kind-hearted and more or less
sympathetic, but he had in him, all the same, the making of a
first-class domestic tyrant. He desired, almost morbidly, to be
respected, and he was ready to force respect by bullying, if necessary.
He knew what every one else knows, moral precepts to the contrary
notwithstanding--that the bully is almost universally respected.

Like all domestic tyrants, he was shamelessly deceived and "managed" by
the women of his establishment. They managed him clumsily. Neither of
them had learned what the doctor had learned at once--that Eddie could
be manipulated with ridiculous ease by the employment of either of two
means. One was to appeal to his sense of justice; the other was
deferentially to ask his advice.

He liked to argue, to discuss, to weigh, to do finally, not without
pompousness, whatever he saw to be right; but the women never addressed
this vulnerable side. They treated him still as if he were a primitive
man, to be coaxed, hoodwinked, pampered, in spite of the fact that he
was not primitive in any way. He got along splendidly in his office,
because there it was acknowledged unanimously that he was not to be
diddled, that he was no fool; but at home he was always treated as if he
were a fool, and a slightly dangerous one. That is, of course, the
accepted attitude toward any master of any house, but it is not always
the most effective.

His anger began to ebb away as he looked at them, and a profound
dejection to take its place.

"It’s no use," he said. "No earthly use! I do the best I can--for the
entire family--to keep things as decent as possible; but I can’t. I get
no help. I can’t do it alone!"

"But Eddie, my dear boy!" said Polly. "It was only to spare your
feelings."

He shook his head.

"It wasn’t. You have some reason which I’ll never know. I’m not blaming
you, Polly. I know you do what you think is best; but if you’d only be
_honest_, regardless of what might happen!"

He stopped, for he had caught Angelica’s eye. He stopped, and his
startled and arrested look said, almost as plainly as words:

"I believe _you_ to be honest!"

He was as much surprised as if she had but that instant appeared.
Indeed, one might quite truly say that he had never before seen her. She
looked so hardy, so bold, so independent, in all ways so different from
the two other women who had just humiliated him. He felt a new and
sudden interest in her.




CHAPTER NINE


I

Angelica was consumed, devoured, by curiosity. She felt obliged to know
more of this family--of Vincent, above all. So the next morning she got
up very early, went down into the kitchen regions, and sought out a
snub-nosed maid who had seemed disposed to be friendly when they had
passed each other in the hall.

The girl wasn’t busy. She was sitting on the back steps, enjoying the
fresh morning; and as soon as she saw Angelica she moved over,
hospitably, to make a place for her.

"Sit down," she said. "It’s a nice day, isn’t it?"

Angelica did sit down, and for a time was silent, looking before her
across lawns as smooth and empty as those at the front of the house.
Nothing at all back-doorish about the outlook; the same air of
prosperous peace; in the distance other houses among their lawns, and
well-trimmed trees, and overhead a lovely May morning sky.

"Yes," she said, "it’s certainly a nice day."

She fell silent again, trying to arrange an opening for her questions;
but the snub-nosed maid spared her the trouble.

"Well!" she said. "How do you like it up-stairs?"

Angelica at once perceived that the other girl was curious.

"Oh-h-h!" she said slowly. "I suppose it’s all right."

Another silence, during which they appraised each other according to
their tradition. A mutual confidence was born.

"They’re a queer bunch," said the girl. "I never saw the like; and I’ve
been with seven families, too."

Here she courteously gave Angelica a brief history of her life and
condition. Her name was Annie McCall, born in Scotland, but brought up
in America, a member of the Plymouth Brethren, twenty-seven, and engaged
to be married. She was extremely severe in her views, which were often
similar to Angelica’s, especially in regard to the immoralities of the
rich. There was this difference, though--Annie was confident that she
knew everything, and was infallibly right, while Angelica was anxious to
learn.

"If it wasn’t that I was going to be married," said Annie, "and saving
every penny, I’d leave. The way they carry on! I never saw the like!"

"Do they carry on?" inquired Angelica, delighted.

Hadn’t she always known that rich people carried on? Wasn’t she just in
a paradise of the romantic, where the rich were bad, and the poor,
represented by herself and the terribly respectable Annie McCall, were
good?

"That Mrs. Russell’s the worst of them all," said Annie. "The bold,
brazen thing she is, with her breeches and her smoking, and her cursing.
You’d ought to hear her curse!"

"She’s queer," said Angelica reflectively.

"Queer!" cried Annie. "Well, _I’d_ call it more than queer! She’s----”
She stopped a moment. "She’s bad," she said.

"Oh! Bad! How?"

"I don’t like to be spreading scandal," said Annie, who always believed
the worst. "It’s not my nature, only that you’ll be working up-stairs
right with her, and you being so young, it’s only right you should be
told. As soon as ever I set eyes on you, I said to myself you’d ought to
be warned. I could see you weren’t used to such people. You never worked
out before, did you?"

"No," Angelica answered.

It was of no use to resent the ‘working out,’ or to tell Annie that she
was a ‘companion,’ because Annie knew very well what her place was.
Angelica’s eating with the family couldn’t deceive her. They were both
servants, and Annie was the better-paid and more respected of the two.
Angelica could not honestly consider herself in any way superior, except
in appearance. Annie spoke rather better than she did, and had had more
schooling; she admitted to money in two savings-banks, and she was
engaged to be married. So Angelica submitted to a temporary equality,
feeling morally sure, however, that the future would see her elevated
immeasurably above Annie.

"How is she bad?" she inquired eagerly.

"She’s a divorced woman," said Annie. "She divorced her first husband,
Mr. Geraldine, and I’ve heard that he was a very nice man--much better
than Dr. Russell, I dare say; too good for her, very likely. Anyway, I
never heard any good of a divorced woman."

"But what does she _do_?" Angelica demanded, rather impatiently.

"You wouldn’t believe it, but she’s carrying on with that chauffeur."

"My Gawd!" said Angelica. "Is she really?"

"It’s the worst I’ve ever heard of. Would you believe it? She’s teaching
him to play golf. They go out in the country somewhere, where they’re
not known. She’s bought him a bag of clubs, and he goes around showing
it to all the chauffeurs, and telling them I don’t know what. He’s a
liar, and I wouldn’t believe a word he said, but still--well, when you
hear a thing right and left--and there’s those clubs and all, and they
cost a terrible lot--you can’t help but think she’s a regular bad
woman."

But Angelica did help thinking so. She didn’t believe that Mrs. Russell
was that sort of bad woman, and the longer she knew her the more
convinced she became of her perfect goodness in this one respect.
Capable of the most outrageous follies, selfish, hard as flint, quite
without scruples in the pursuit of her own liberty and pleasure, she
was, however, not interested in men. Angelica said nothing, though, for
she had no proofs or surmises to bring forward, nothing but her own
instinct.

Annie continued.

"No, I can’t help thinking so. I’m no fool. I’ve seen a lot--you do,
working out. It’s a pity, too, on account of Mr. Eddie. He’s a nice
young man, and he works himself sick for the lot of them. No one doing a
stroke of work but him!"

"Don’t that doctor work?"

"Dr. Russell? He’s a regular old grafter, that’s what _he_ is."

"I saw him putting cigars in his pocket," said Angelica.

"I’ve seen worse than that. I’ve seen him going through _her_ bureau
drawers, and taking anything he has a fancy for. He’ll come down with a
flask, fill it with anything that’s left in the decanters, and take it
up-stairs and drink until he falls asleep on the floor. They say it’s
terrible bad to drink things all mixed together like that."

"Does he know about her carrying on?"

"He don’t care, so long as he’s got a good home and a little money to
spend. I never saw such people in all my life! And they never have any
decent company. Mrs. Geraldine----”

"Why do they call her Mrs. Geraldine?"

"Because that’s her name," said Annie, surprised. "That used to be Mrs.
Russell’s name. It’s Mr. Eddie’s and Mr. Vincent’s name. Didn’t you
know?"

"It’s a queer name," Angelica remarked thoughtfully. "I thought it was
her first name."

Nothing in the universe seemed specially queer to Annie.

"Well, as I was saying, Mrs. Geraldine, she hasn’t any friends, except
out West, and Mr. Eddie, he hasn’t got any time to make any, and there’s
no one ever comes here but _her_ lot from that country club--a lot of
swearing, drinking, smoking men and women. She fills the house with
them, and then Mr. Eddie’ll make a great row and say he won’t put up
with them, and then she’ll smile, that superior way, and say, ‘Very
well, Eddie, it’s your house!’ Then, when she thinks he’s kind of
forgotten, she’ll have them in again."

"But what’s the other feller like?" asked Angelica.

"Him!" cried Annie. "Why!" she was at a loss for words to express what
she felt. "He’s----” She hesitated. "He’s _crazy_, and downright wicked.
They call him religious. Sacrilegious, I call it. Every once in a while
he’ll get a fit of feeling sorry for his wickedness, and he’ll be
moaning and groaning about his soul, and working himself up to write his
religious poems. Why," she cried, "it’s as different from the real
repentance of a sinner, such as I’ve seen many and many a time in our
meetings, as can be. He’s never seen the light, and he never will. He’s
lost!"

"What does he do that’s wicked?" asked Angelica, avid for details of
rich people’s sins.

"Everything--drink and women and blasphemy. Why, right now he’s gone off
with a girl. Courtland saw him meet her."

But no further questions on the part of Angelica could elicit any more
details. Annie didn’t want to talk about him; he was what she called a
hardened sinner, and she considered him best ignored. She began to talk
of Polly.

"She’s the best of the lot," she said. "She’s a real lady. She’s
reasonable. She’ll never ask you for all sorts of outlandish things, all
hours of the day and night, like the other one. She’s stingy, I must
confess; she never gives you a penny, nor even an old dress or a hat;
but at least she’s nice and polite. I’m sorry for her, too, losing that
little boy. He was a sweet little thing, even if----”

The cook appeared on the porch--an untidy, bedraggled old Irishwoman.

"Come in, the two of ye!" she said. "Let your friend come in and eat a
bite with us, Annie, if she’s not too proud."

"You might as well," said Annie. "They won’t be eating for another half
an hour, and we’ve got just as good as they have."

"Better," said the cook. "You can trust me for that, Annie McCall!"

They went, not into the kitchen, as Angelica had expected, but into a
nice little dining-room, to a meal served and eaten with decorum and
propriety, a table daintily laid, and a breakfast beyond cavil--coffee
with cream, beefsteak, cold ham, new-laid eggs, hot rolls, corn-bread,
jams and marmalades, and a fine bowl of fruit.

The cook sat down behind the coffee-pot, with Angelica beside her.
Presently in came the chambermaid, the German laundress, and a mild
little thing known as the "second girl"; and, at last, swaggering, in
his shirt-sleeves, Courtland the chauffeur.

His eye fell at once upon Angelica.

"Hello!" he said. "What’s the matter? Did they kick you out up-stairs?"

"They sent me down to see how you behaved yourself," she answered,
promptly.

She was quite able to hold her own with this young bully, and though her
manner was too free and easy to suit Annie, the others were
delighted--especially the cook.

"_Now_ will ye be good?" she would cry to the worsted Courtland. "Now
you’ve met your match, me lad!"

Angelica enjoyed all this beyond measure. This homely simplicity,
combined with the greatest comfort, this atmosphere in which she lost
her painful consciousness of inferiority, in which she was among equals
and able to breathe freely, invigorated and satisfied her. She grew more
and more assured, her sallies more and more outrageous, in a violent
badinage that continued until the bell rang and Annie ran off up-stairs.
She returned to tell Courtland that he was wanted in fifteen minutes.

"Oh, Gawd!" he groaned. "It’s a tennis tournament to-day. Me sitting out
in a blame country road in the hot sun all the afternoon. My Lawd! Don’t
I wish that old fool’d learn enough to stay home, or go to the city, to
the theayters and stores!"

"And giff you de chance to see your schweetheart?" asked the laundress,
coyly.

"Which one?" he demanded, boldly.

"Ye’ll need a lot of thim," said the cook. "For there’s no one girl
could put up with ye long. Why are ye not playing your golf to-day, me
lord?"

"She makes me sick!" he answered, angrily. "There she goes and gets me
interested in the game and all, and then she drops it. Why, you know,
she promised me at the start she’d train me good and I could go in a
tournament. She said she’d introduce me as a friend of hers. She said I
was built to be a first-class player, and maybe I’d get to be a
perfessional."

"Don’t believe everything _she’ll_ be telling you!" said the cook.

"Damn old fool!" he muttered.

Annie reproved him.

"You’ve got no right to speak like that about a lady," she said.

"Shut up!" he said briefly.

"Go along with you!" cried the cook. "She’ll be waiting."

"Leave her wait! She makes me wait enough. If she don’t like waiting for
me, leave her say so. I can get plenty of jobs--better than this one,
too. I don’t have to put up with nothing from her!"


II

It was only half-past eight, and Angelica didn’t know what to do with
herself. She was in a rebellious and malicious mood; she had been fired
by Courtland’s attitude, and she, too, wished to keep some rich person
waiting. It was the attitude which is the despair of employers--the
spirit in which the young workman comes sauntering in, insolently late,
not because he wishes to lose his job or because he is, as they put it,
looking for trouble, but because, for this one day, this one hour, he
must assert himself, must be a man, must delude himself that he is not
inferior, not helpless, not driven.

So Angelica, this morning, was ready to assert that servants were in all
ways better than those they served, that poor people were all good and
rich ones all bad. She felt a warm glow of friendliness toward the
subordinate class, and a profound hostility toward their oppressors. She
wanted to swagger about it, to tell Mrs. Russell, loudly, that those
jolly, comprehensible people in the kitchen were vastly superior to her
in every respect.

She went defiantly about the lower floor, into the library, into the
breakfast-room, where the remains of Mr. Eddie’s meal still stood, into
the music-room, even into the august drawing-room, where she had never
before set foot.

"_I_ don’t care!" she said. "If they don’t like it, they can tell me!"

But she met no one. Thwarted of a victim, she went out upon the veranda
and sat down in a rocking-chair, facing the prospect already so
monotonous to her--the neat, smooth lawns, the orderly trees, the
dignified houses.

"Makes me sick!" she said, aloud. "Nothing to look at--nothing to do!"

Suddenly her chair was tilted back and a hand laid over her eyes--a
soft, cool hand. She pushed at it, roughly, and it was lifted, and she
saw bending over her the bland, smiling face of the doctor. He was in
flannels, well cut, quite correct, but with an air obnoxiously dapper.
His white head was bare, and he wore a flower in his coat.

"You let me alone!" said Angelica.

"I can’t!"

"I guess you can!" she observed grimly.

"But you’re so pretty! You’ve no business to be so pretty."

"I dare say I’ll get over that in the course of time."

"Seriously," he said, "I don’t think I’ve ever seen finer eyes. Have you
ever thought of going on the stage? And as far as I can judge, you have
a beautiful figure. Of course I don’t _know_----”

"None of that now!" she cried, flushing angrily. "Get away from the back
of my chair. I don’t want you hanging around me, anyway."

"You’re very hard," he said. "Very! Don’t you like me, Miss Angelica?"

"Not much."

"But why?"

"Go and look in the glass, grandpa," she answered.

He reddened.

"I suppose I do seem old--in your eyes," he said; "but after all, it’s
only a question of how you _feel_; and I feel as young as you do. It
takes a man of experience and maturity to appreciate a woman. Boys can’t
understand, but a man of my age has learned how a woman likes to be
treated."

"Well, he’s learned too late, then," said Angelica. "They’ll never give
him a chance to show off what he knows."

"Oh, yes, they do," he retorted, preening himself. "I could tell you of
more than one little girl who doesn’t think I’m too old. You, too, when
you know me better, you’ll find me just as----”

"Now, look here, grandpa," said Angelica. "What are you leading up to?
Because if you think you can get fresh with me, you’ve made a big
mistake. Guess again, grandpa!"

"Don’t call me that!" he protested. "It’s vulgar."

She looked at him scornfully, then turned her back upon him and once
more regarded the tiresome view. The doctor, after a glance at her
severe profile, gave up his attempt and changed his attitude. He sat
down jauntily astride of a chair and began joking. She never tired of
that, and although he did, although he grew painfully weary of this
rough and silly jesting, he was compensated by the sight of her
brilliant face.

But inevitably he began to grow bolder again.

"My dear, your shoe’s untied!" he said suddenly.

He threw himself on his knees before her and clasped her ankle in his
hand. She gave him a vigorous push with her foot that sent him rolling
over backward, knocking his white head against a chair. She laughed
immoderately, with abandon, all the more because he was so furious, her
head thrown back, her eyes closed.

And it was just at this minute that Eddie came out, to see his
father-in-law struggling to his feet, while Angelica shrieked with
laughter.

"What’s this?" he demanded severely.

No one answered, but Angelica’s mirth was checked.

"What has happened?" he asked again, with still greater displeasure.

"I slipped," said the doctor. "Where’s your mother, my boy?"

This was an attempt to disarm Eddie by reminding him that the doctor was
his mother’s husband, and therefore venerable; but it was not
successful. He received no reply, and went sauntering off with
exaggerated jauntiness, watched by Eddie till he was out of sight.

Then Eddie turned to Angelica.

"I’m sorry," he said gravely.

"Oh, it don’t matter!" she answered. "I can take care of myself all
right."

"I wasn’t apologizing for my father-in-law’s conduct. I meant I was
sorry that _you_----”

"Me?" she cried, indignantly. "I didn’t do anything!"

"I hate to think of you stooping to this sort of thing--this silly
vulgarity. It isn’t like you. It isn’t worthy of you!"

The former factory girl, with her long memory of scenes so much more
vulgar and silly than this--of faces slapped and insults replied to with
most forcible language--stared, astounded, at Eddie, at his displeased
and disappointed face.

"You ought to be more dignified," he said. "You say you want to improve
yourself. Then, in that case, this sort of thing----”

She really had seen nothing reprehensible in her conduct, nothing to be
censured. She knew, of course, that a girl in her situation mustn’t
spend her time in "fooling" with the men of the household; but to
disapprove it on high moral grounds ...!

However, the word "dignified" gave her a clue. It was those magnificent
women he had in mind! She was falling short of their standard, and
therefore disappointing Eddie. She wasn’t being magnificent.

She looked up at him.

"I see!" she said thoughtfully. "All right! I’ll try!"

"That’s right," he said. "I knew--if it were pointed out to you--that
that sort of thing is so out of keeping with your character----”

"With your face," he meant. He meant, without being aware of it, that
any sort of coarseness in a girl so lovely and desirable was a shocking
offense to him.

Angelica left him, inspired by the loftiest thoughts. She was resolved
to redeem this day begun so inauspiciously, breakfasting with the
servants, knocking over the white-haired doctor. She pictured a new
Angelica, stately and aloof.

"He does me good--that feller!" she reflected.




CHAPTER TEN


I

It now became the aim of Angelica’s life to satisfy Eddie. She felt that
his standard was the right one, however painfully high it might be, and
that he was genuinely concerned with helping her to attain it. And she
felt that, in spite of his youthfulness and his somewhat grandiloquent
air, he was a remarkable and an admirable man.

The more she saw of him, the more she admired him. She was a shrewd
enough observer, yet she never detected in him a single lapse from his
own rigid principles. What he set out to do, he did; what he determined
to be, he was. She had not knowledge or experience enough to see that he
was ignorant, crude, and childlike; she could see only his force, his
strength of will, the earnestness of his ambition, and his complete
ingenuousness.

He went directly to Polly. He told her that Angelica was ambitious, and
that he wished to help her.

"So any evenings that you don’t need her," he said, "she can come to me
and study. I’ll look out some books for her."

Polly smiled and agreed.

"It’s another of poor Eddie’s Utopian schemes," she said to her
mother-in-law. "I don’t know what he expects to accomplish with the
girl."

"I only hope _she_ won’t accomplish anything!" said Mrs. Russell. "She’s
very pretty, and Eddie’s so susceptible. Of course, he thinks it’s a sin
to think of a girl as a girl, but still----”

They didn’t at all like this educational project, but Mrs. Russell was
too careless and Polly too sensible to interfere. Besides which, it
didn’t look really alarming. Eddie was not the sort--it would have been
impossible to Eddie--to contemplate illicit relations with Angelica, and
with his extreme propriety he was certainly not likely to consider
marrying her. It was simply an annoyance to have her thus exalted. They
were irritated and somewhat contemptuous, but they said nothing. They
took care never to discuss Eddie in her presence.

It was a recognized fact that she and Eddie were allies. They were oddly
alike in many ways. They had the same sort of careless austerity;
neither of them cared whether a chair were comfortable or not, the soup
hot or cold, the weather propitious; they disdained fatigue, were ready
to work all day and all night to achieve an object, and had a fierce and
driving ambition for power and distinction. But Angelica was coarser and
stronger, while Eddie was more sensitive and very much more scrupulous.
He was ruled by ideas, she was ruled by her vigorous impulses.

Polly very rarely wanted Angelica in the evening, and Mrs. Russell dared
not summon her, so that it became quite a usual thing for her to go
up-stairs with Eddie directly after dinner and settle down with some
valuable book of his selection. He didn’t make any attempt really to
teach her; she could as well have sat in her own room to read, but that
would have entirely destroyed the character of the thing for Eddie. She
must be sitting there, under his eye, docile, earnest, his pupil.

Sometimes he worked, sometimes he was himself engaged with one of his
instructive books, which he bought in sets; but whatever it was, he very
rarely spoke to her. He maintained his pose of imperturbability, which
she knew well enough to be only a pose.

It didn’t take her long to see how it was with him. She understood that
sort of thing so well! She saw how drawn he was to her, how she stirred
his ardent blood; and she rejoiced and brought out all her tricks to
torment him. When she wanted something explained, she would bring her
book to him and stand beside him, leaning against him, bending over so
that her hair brushed his cheek. She had attitudes that were poems of
allurement; there were certain tones in her voice, certain little
gestures, which she saw enthralled and disturbed and shocked him.

"She doesn’t know what she’s doing!" he would think.

Well, she didn’t exactly. She was well enough aware of the effect of her
naughty wiles upon him, and upon other men; but she had never
experienced the thing herself, never yet been transfixed by a dart such
as she delighted to shoot. At first she was proud and gleeful; but after
she had seen his painful effort to retain his dignity--his majesty, one
might say--undisturbed, she felt a sort of respectful pity for him, and
desisted.

She had no illusions; she didn’t fancy that his inclination toward her
was love; she never dreamed of marrying him, and she understood him and
herself too well even to contemplate any other sort of alliance. She
ceased her tricks, became honest and sober with him, and sat at his feet
to learn what she could. The knowledge that she was desirable in his
eyes did good to Angelica, for it gave her more confidence, more hope of
attaining ultimate magnificence. She showed him her natural self,
inquisitive, eager, strong, ready for any sacrifice, any denial, that
might help her in her progress, a nature at once ardent and calculating,
a cool, shrewd, subtle Italian mind.

As for herself, she wasn’t in the slightest degree attracted by Eddie.
She admired him and respected him, she felt a warm friendliness toward
him, but no smallest trace of love or desire. It wasn’t possible; he
wasn’t the man for her; he wasn’t her sort.

In contrast, and running parallel with this life of effort and progress
under Eddie’s direction, ran the other existence, the lazy, soft life of
the harem. One-half of her time she was studying, reflecting, earnestly
considering her manners and deportment; the other half she spent with
Mrs. Russell and Polly, in a thoroughly demoralizing uselessness.

Laziness was Polly’s darling vice. She had long passed the stage of
struggling against it; now she hugged it, enjoyed it without shame. She
lay in bed, in a chaise-longue, or on a sofa, hour after hour, smoking
cigarettes, lost in her sorrowful reveries. Where on earth was she to
find an incentive to activity? There was no one whom she might love and
serve; no effort was necessary to obtain all the luxuries possible. Her
old love of her art lay buried beneath her grief; she felt that she had
all that she could ever expect in life.

She had got quite used to Angelica now, and more or less fond of her.
She liked to have the girl near, sitting with one of Eddie’s books;
absorbed in it, yet instantly ready for any service required.

"Do you know, Angelica," Polly said to her one day, "the very nicest
thing about you is that you never fidget!"

Angelica considered that.

"No," she said. "I know I don’t. I see other people squirming and
wriggling all the time, and I wonder--I don’t know--I _am_ quiet; but
I’ve got lots of life in me."

"I should say you had! Just my antithesis, aren’t you? I’m quiet, too,
but it’s because I haven’t any life in me at all."

"Well," said Angelica, displaying no interest in Polly’s state of mind,
and reverting, as she generally did, to herself, "I’m always kind of
expecting something to happen. So I just--wait."

Her naïve egoism never affronted Polly. Disillusioned, she would have
been rendered uneasy by affection or great interest; she liked it this
way, with no pretense on either side, nothing to keep up. She never
affected any interest in Angelica, although she couldn’t attain her
companion’s supreme self-absorption. She was obliged, now and then, to
ask a question; in fact, she couldn’t help being curious about Angelica,
who was not at all curious about her.

She was sometimes a little piqued by the young creature’s cool
assumption that she was of no interest. She knew, as all other people
know, what lay within herself, how different she was from every one else
who had ever lived, how interesting she was, both in her qualities and
her experiences, a thing true of every one; and yet how impossible it is
to make others see it!

Polly was a woman of curious temperament--intense, sensitive, flexible,
and yet protected and perhaps isolated by a certain cool good sense. She
was an artist, a musician, a woman who had twice loved and twice been
most cruelly deceived and rebuffed, who had suffered and thought very
much and very bitterly, if not very profoundly; but she was also the
simple daughter of a small town, a woman who liked a long and leisurely
gossip, who had sane and healthy blood flowing beneath her idle
hypochondria. Woman of the world, smoker of cigarettes, reader of the
most astounding books, seasoned as she was, disillusioned, heart-sick, a
bit theatrical, perhaps, in her utter indifference, she was nevertheless
the same Polly who would have heartily enjoyed a day spent in
jelly-making, or nut-gathering, or sewing with a friendly and talkative
group of her own Ohio women.

She had very little in common with Mrs. Russell. They didn’t really like
each other, but being unoccupied, and in somewhat similar circumstances,
they got on well enough together. The whole household got on together,
in fact. There were intrigues, incredibly petty and subtle struggles and
plots, but nothing overt.

The other two women accepted this new favourite of Eddie’s with resigned
tolerance; they made use of her, but they were quite kind. They, too,
had an influence on Angelica; they taught her something, a little of the
compromise that must be made with life. You didn’t have to love people
or to hate them--you had only to get on with them. She could not but
admire their charming good-humour, their complete lack of the
aggressiveness which the people she had known before had been obliged to
cultivate. They were all three so _comfortable_ together!


II

It was one of those summer afternoons which had such an indescribable
charm for Angelica. She wasn’t used to idleness, and it delighted her,
this sitting about, with a long stretch of empty hours ahead, to fill as
one pleased. They were all in Mrs. Russell’s big, airy room, with the
green blinds drawn down and flapping in a steady little breeze. It was
very hot, and, as was their custom when Eddie was not home, they were in
undress. Polly hated the hot weather, and didn’t care to move; she lay
on a rattan couch, smoking, with her eyes closed, and with an electric
fan blowing across her.

Mrs. Russell was stretched out in a deck chair; beside her stood a small
table with a bottle of whiskey and a siphon of soda, of which she
partook from time to time--very small drinks, but tolerably frequent.
Her face was crimson; her hair, for greater coolness, was pulled back
into a tight knot; she wore very little but a lace combing-jacket and a
short silk petticoat, which, as she sat with her long legs crossed,
showed a great expanse of gray silk stocking. She was a freak, a fright,
whatever you like, but she had a certain ineffaceable distinction. Her
voice, her gestures--Angelica watched her with interest. She was telling
jokes, outrageous stories that convulsed the other two with laughter.

"My _dear_! _Where_ do you hear such things?" Polly protested after each
one, and lay waiting for more.

Angelica rejoiced in a lovely cast-off garment of Mrs. Russell’s, light
as gossamer, pale yellow, with taffeta bows. Its coquetry was
incongruous with her dark and somber face, but it was bewitching,
nevertheless. She sat in a low rocking-chair opposite a mirror, content
to look now and then and to speculate endlessly upon the destiny of that
thin, languorous figure, dressed like a rich person, lounging like one,
beautiful, mysterious, alluring. Her bare arms were clasped behind her
head, in that attitude which so well reveals the line of neck and bust.
Seen from the door, in profile, she would have been an exquisite
picture.

And she was seen from the door. Mrs. Russell, facing in that direction,
gave a start of surprise, so that Angelica turned and saw a man standing
there.

He was a big, heavy, swaggering fellow, in baggy knickerbockers and an
old shooting-jacket hanging loosely from his powerful shoulders, with a
fierce, hawk-like face and bright gray eyes. He looked at them with a
sort of contemptuous amusement.

"_Vincent!_" cried Mrs. Russell.

"Well?" he asked, smiling.

"Eddie’s been so----”

"Eddie be damned! How are you, Polly?"

"Quite well, thank you, Vincent," she answered with simplicity.

"You’re looking better," he assured her in friendly manner. "And mamma?"

"Don’t be so provoking!" she cried, trying to be angry, but at heart, as
one could plainly see, filled with idiotic admiration for this big,
impudent son. "Don’t pretend to be so calm and cool! What are you going
to tell Eddie?"

Angelica jumped up from her chair, and then sat down again. Vincent took
no notice of her.

"Let’s have a drink," he said, and sat down beside his mother. "Ah! And
now another!"

He was certainly theatrical, playing to his little audience the part of
the idolized conqueror, the man to whom everything is permitted; but he
did it well. He could carry it off; it was evident that he had them both
in his pocket.

He talked to them with conscious mastery. His mother was silly and
adoring; Polly, in spite of all her reserve and her deep and hidden
resentment against him, couldn’t hide a sort of charmed interest. They
listened to him and looked at him, while he, sprawled out in his chair,
smoked a pipe and stared at the ceiling.

And then, suddenly, just for an instant, his falcon glance rested upon
Angelica, upon the swarthy face that turned pale beneath it. Her heart
stood still; she stared at his bold, careless face with a feeling that
was almost like terror. She had never seen his like before, never seen
so free and strong a spirit in any human creature.

She had met her match, and she knew it. She could never conquer him! It
was a sensation unique in her life; never imagined before, never to be
experienced again. She forgot herself completely, didn’t give a thought
to the impression she might be making upon this man. She thought only of
him, watched him, listened to him, in a sort of stupour.

He didn’t look at her again, but she knew that he was conscious of her,
and that he included her among his audience. He went on, always like an
adored actor secure of rapt attention, telling them things, painting
vivid pictures for them. In the midst of his finest phrases, he would
use the coarsest and bluntest of old words, abruptly, like a gross
insult in a love sonnet. He aimed deliberately to startle and amaze, and
he succeeded. The three women listened spell-bound; Angelica above all,
quite caught in his net.

He told them about a play he had seen the night before, and an actress
in it who had caught his fancy.

"That woman!" he said. "Good God! A fair, thin virgin--inviting with her
troubled eyes the fiercest lusts--still innocent, still trembling on the
threshold of her life. What an actress! Polly, you would have enjoyed
her work."

"I don’t doubt it, Vincent."

"I’ll take you some evening soon. But no, I forgot. I’m going away."

"Oh, Vincent, _again_?" cried his mother.

He looked at her with a strange smile.

"Yes," he said, "and for a long time."

Polly, so many times hurt, so long ignored, remained quite still and
indifferent. Only Angelica saw her thin fingers clench, and then open
listlessly. She didn’t open her eyes or speak.

"Where?" asked his mother.

"You ask me?" he demanded. "I am a man. Pray, where should I go?"

No one was able to answer, and he frowned again.

"There’s only one destination possible," he said; "one spot on earth
that draws toward it all of us who are men--a place of blood and
destruction, of utter loneliness and frightful agony, where we rush to
embrace that most maddening and most tender of mistresses----”

"Oh, Vincent!" cried Mrs. Russell, distressed. "Don’t talk that way
before Polly!"

He threw back his head and laughed.

"A mistress who breaks all hearts--of whom all loving souls are mad with
jealousy--a mistress to whom no man is unfaithful--beautiful Death!" he
cried.

His mother gave a sort of shriek.

"Vincent! You’re not going to kill yourself?"

"No!" he cried. "No! To kill my brother!"

"_Kill Eddie?_"

"Don’t be such a damned fool!" he said, irritably, annoyed that she had
misunderstood and cheapened his climax. "I’m going to the war."

Until that moment they had, to tell the truth, taken very little notice
of this war. It had been going on for some weeks, with great head-lines
in the papers, but in their isolated group it had very little
significance. Their routine was in no way interrupted. Eddie worried
over it, but then he worried over everything. He said it was disastrous
for the market. However, they were quite sure that he would bring home
money for them, if not in one way, then in another, and they weren’t
really disturbed.

And now suddenly the war and Vincent came bursting in upon them with
violence.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

I


Vincent, of course, had to go out of the room at once after that
declaration, leaving the three women astounded.

Mrs. Russell was the first to bestir herself. Perhaps because she was
conscious that her emotions were so feeble, she always strained to
emphasize, to exaggerate them. She at once affected a great excitement.
She began rushing about, under the pretense of "getting Vincent’s room
ready," and telling the servants that Mr. Vincent was home.

"And he’s going to the war, Annie!" she cried. "Isn’t that _dreadful_?"

Polly took no part in this movement. She went back into her own room and
sat down before her dressing-table.

"I’ll do my own hair, Angelica," she said, with a new frigidity in her
manner that surprised her companion.

"All right!" Angelica answered, with a trace of sulkiness.

"You can go if you like," Polly went on. "I won’t need you any more
to-night. I think, Angelica, you’d better have your dinner in your room.
Mr. Geraldine might not like a stranger at the table the first evening
he’s home."

"All right!" said Angelica again, turning obediently to the door.

But she did not attempt to conceal a most provoking smile--to show Polly
that she knew the cause of all this.

She went trailing back to her own room in the yellow negligée, and shut
herself in, happy enough to be alone and unobserved. After all, what did
it matter if she couldn’t come down to dinner, couldn’t see him at all
that evening? She could think about him; she could recall his face and
his voice; rejoice again in that unaccountable thrill.

She leaned back in her chair, her arms clasped behind her head, a
strange and divinely stupid smile on her lips. Just at the threshold of
love she was lingering, in that little moment before there is desire or
pain, when love is without substance, without thought, a dim ecstasy,
with no more motive, no more basis for its joy, than the dream of an
opium-smoker.

"Gawd!" she said to herself, with a grin. "I guess I’m hit _this_ time,
all right!"


II

There was a knock at the door. She went leisurely to open it, with the
expectation of seeing her dinner served on a tray; but it was Eddie, the
loyal Eddie, come to fetch her. He was rather pale and quite unsmiling.

"If you’ll get dressed," he said. "We’re waiting for you to come to
dinner."

"Mrs. Geraldine said----”

"It doesn’t matter. You must come. I wouldn’t sit down without you."

He looked at her, and his face twitched. She looked so strange, so
terribly aloof! He was unstrung, anyhow. He had had a beastly interview
with his brother, and a somewhat unpleasant five minutes with Polly,
whom he so much admired. He had really annoyed her, for the sake of this
devilish girl. He was filled with dread and distress, with a wretched
sense of impending calamity--what people call a presentiment. Perhaps it
was because his mind unconsciously recognized all the elements here for
a hellish conflagration.

"Hurry, won’t you?" he said. "We’re waiting."

She did hurry, and her dressing took only ten minutes; but she was very
much surprised to find Eddie still waiting for her, and still more
surprised when he took her by the arm and for the first time used her
name.

"Angelica!" he said in a low voice.

"What?" she asked, startled.

"Don’t!"

"Don’t what, Mr. Eddie?"

He didn’t answer, but he squeezed her arm, and when she looked up into
his face it was desperately anxious.

"All right!" she said, half understanding what he wished her to
understand.

For she, too, was vaguely aware of danger; she, too, could dimly
perceive whither her eager feet were leading her; but she ran to it,
flew to it. She, too, had an odd and terrible feeling of approaching ill
fortune. She felt disaster drawing near, yet was not able even to wish
to avoid it.

She sat down at the table, next to Vincent; and she hadn’t been there
for fifteen minutes before she was lost. His bold eyes rested on her
face, and all her own boldness turned to surrender, her own fierceness
melted. She couldn’t turn away from him; she sat very still, enthralled,
listening to his voice, watching his mobile face, the fine, straight
brows moving so expressively, his supple hands.

He was still in his rough sport clothes, and his bright brown hair was
ruffled. He had an air about him of fine, arrogant carelessness that she
could worship. He had none of Eddie’s punctilio, no sort of nice
manners; he had only an indifferent ease, a most complete disregard for
any other living soul.

He interrupted without compunction, he made no pretense of listening; he
wanted to do all the talking, and he wanted to be listened to with
respect. Well, why not? Angelica wished nothing better than to look at
him and listen to him forever; she couldn’t bear the idea of having to
leave his presence.

Every time she looked at him, he was looking at her--at those curious
eyes not quite alike. She was bewitched; she scarcely knew what she was
doing. She felt that she shouldn’t look at him so much, but that was
quite beyond her control. The other people seemed dim and far away,
hardly audible. He was filling up the world.

He talked of the war, and his words were glorious. Oh, he was a poet,
truly! His talk of blood and battles fired her imagination. Eddie’s
studious dissertations upon the rights and wrongs of the conflict seemed
to her contemptible. A man mustn’t go to war because it is his duty, but
because he loves it; because he is a hero, like Vincent.

"I’m going!" he said. "I long for it. It’s the completion of a man’s
life. Until he has fought and killed, a man has not lived. That is his
manhood, his glory. Think of all Europe rushing, blood-mad, to the
Flanders battlefields, all the young and the fine and the strong herded
there, to kill or to die! My God! The very pinnacle of life!"

"Or the lowest depth," said Eddie.

Vincent laughed.

"You’re no warrior, my dear boy," he said. "Well, we don’t expect it of
you."

Eddie grew red.

"I dare say I’m as much of a warrior as the next man," he said. "I dare
say I’d like it--this fighting and killing; but I don’t see anything
fine about it. I don’t glorify it. I think it’s beastly. There are
plenty of things that I’d enjoy that I don’t by any means admire. This
fighting is a filthy relic of our old barbarous days."

"Then so are all our splendid passions, my boy. God keep us barbarous,
and men! You chilly, cowering little pen-drivers----”

"That’s enough!" said Eddie. "You’re talking rot--pure rot!"

He was making a desperate effort to control a furious anger; for the
sake of his own dignity he didn’t dare to quarrel with Vincent. He knew
his brother and his unholy resources too well.

"All those chaps in offices and so on," he continued. "You don’t know
anything about them. If it comes to the test----”

"Oh, you’ll all do your duty, all you little money-grubbers!" said
Vincent. "I don’t doubt that; but what we need--what the world is sick
for, _dying_ for--is men who are inspired."

"They might be inspired by something better than drunken enthusiasm,"
said Eddie.

Vincent laughed again, and looked around the table at his worshipping
women; but his glance rested upon Angelica. She caught her breath,
stared up at him; and then, for the first time, smiled at him, a smile
quite strange to her, trembling and uncertain.


III

Eddie pushed back his chair and got up.

"Miss Kennedy," he said, "I’ve some more books for you--if you’ll come
and get them."

"All right!" she answered carelessly.

He hesitated a moment, as if he were about to speak; then he went on
up-stairs into his room, leaving the door open so that he could watch
the lighted hall. He saw his mother go by, into her own room; then he
heard the sound of the piano down-stairs--Polly’s familiar touch.

"I suppose she’ll stay down there--jabbering!" he said to himself,
jealous, hurt beyond measure. "When _he_ comes, with his damned swagger,
of course she has no further use for--for study and improvement. She’ll
forget all about coming!"

He couldn’t read, himself. He sat facing the door, restless, miserable.
There came to his mind so many stories he had read, operas he had heard,
with the tragic rivalry of brothers for their theme. And wasn’t he the
very prototype of the good brother; the one who is always wronged by
the reckless, handsome one--by Vincent? He thrust the thought away.
Damned nonsense! No one was in love with any one else in this house!

He recognized an old and most unworthy adversary in this jealousy,
something which he had tried for years to combat. It was the most
convincing proof of Eddie’s greatness of soul that he did so struggle
with this envy, and that he did not hate his brother. He had every
possible reason for doing so. He had the memory of years and years of
injuries and injustices; he had seen this brother always exalted above
him, always held up to him as an example of all the social virtues.

"If you’d only try to be more like Vincent!" his mother used to sigh.

Eddie couldn’t dance, couldn’t sing, couldn’t in any sort of way
ingratiate himself. He wasn’t liked. His goodness itself was perhaps the
chief thing against him.

"I never worry about Eddie," Mrs. Russell had often said in his hearing.
"He’s perfectly safe." And he knew that this was a most unattractive
thing to be.

He had never got on with Vincent. There was only two years’ difference
between them, and Eddie had never been able to make even this apparent.
He was smaller, he developed much more slowly, he never could obtain any
of the prestige due to him as the elder. Eddie, at nineteen, had been
nothing but a somewhat priggish and very shy school-boy, while Vincent,
at seventeen, was a young man.

It must not be imagined, however, that Eddie was in any way subservient
to his brother. For the most part, they were quite indifferent to each
other. They very rarely met; they went to different schools, and Eddie
spent his holidays with his mother and Vincent with his father. When
their father died, and they were once more under one roof, with their
mother, they had separate friends, separate interests.

When anything did bring them together, they fought. Eddie had more than
once been sent rolling in the dirt by his bigger brother; and in spite
of the tradition that the normal boy loves the fellow who pummels him
most heartily, this didn’t breed affection in Eddie’s heart. He resented
it. He was fiendishly proud and sensitive, and he couldn’t forget such
outrages.

He had fleeting visions of certain miserable moments--visions of the
triumphant and exuberant Vincent, of being taken to see Vincent
graduated with honours, to hear him read a valedictory poem he had
written, to see him surrounded, overwhelmed with admiration, of watching
him win races, play in tennis tournaments and amateur theatricals, of
hearing him sing. It seemed to him that he had spent a great part of his
youth sitting beside his mother and watching Vincent show off.

There were facets to Vincent’s nature which he never regarded or
attempted to comprehend. This poetic stuff, for instance. He had heard
Vincent recite from his work, but he hadn’t seen much in it for
admiration. He had simply taken for granted what every one told him,
that his brother was a poet. It had never occurred to him that there
were grades of poets.

There was something mysterious at which he merely guessed, a side to his
brother too amazing and unpleasant to contemplate. Eddie, with his rigid
self-discipline, his ceaseless struggle to perfect himself, could in no
way comprehend the laxity, the facile debauchery, the equally facile
repentance, of an ill-balanced and self-indulgent soul. He had more than
once fancied he heard his brother weeping and groaning, sometimes shut
in with his mother, sometimes with Polly; but when he actually saw
him--big, strong, insolent, forever bragging of his manhood--he couldn’t
believe it. He couldn’t reconcile the idea of hysterical weakness with
this conquering creature. He imagined it must be merely some expression
of the poetic temperament.

No, this victorious brother was without blemish; he had become in
Eddie’s eyes a rival of quite fantastic perfection. He was handsome, he
was strong, he was fascinating, he was a poet; he had every
accomplishment, every charm. He was not to be withstood.

And, just as he was reflecting, he saw Angelica go by the door,
absolutely oblivious of him, without so much as turning her head. He
heard her door close; he waited, but he knew it was of no use. She had
forgotten him!


IV

Polly, too, was thinking of Vincent. With that pitiful stupidity of
women, who can never quite believe themselves without attraction, she
had seated herself at the piano and begun to play. She knew he loved
music; she hoped to interest him with a curious new piece.

She wasn’t in love with him any longer. She didn’t even wish him,
exactly, to love her; but she was passionately anxious to secure his
attention. She had that hunger which all really fine women have--the
hunger for being appreciated, recognized. She deluded herself with the
idea that after an episode with some worthless little hussy, he couldn’t
help but contrast such a creature with Polly, and be filled with remorse
and respect.

As a matter of fact, he felt nothing in the world but irritation. He did
contrast Polly with the girl whom he had left the day before, but it was
to the disadvantage of his wife. He saw her to be sallow, weary, faded.
She had, he thought, only one good point--she didn’t nag; didn’t even
ask where he’d been.

He came and listened to her music. She saw him sitting close to her,
with a look of pleasure on his face, and she put all her art, all her
skill, into her playing; but when she glanced up from a difficult
passage, he had gone.

She went on playing, but it was mournful, dispirited music; the
improvisings of a forlorn heart.

Mrs. Russell alone never gave a thought to Vincent. She had gone to bed
very early, as she liked to do, and lay reading a French detective
story. Her eyes were bright with interest; she was delighted.


V

Angelica had not turned on the light. She sat by the open window of her
room, near which a big lime-tree was rustling in the dark. The grass,
the bushes, the clouds, were all moving, and she fancied that moths and
bats and other little night creatures fluttered by. The breeze was going
past her; she felt none of it on her face. She had an impression of
being spectator of a mighty procession, forever passing her window in
dim, dark shapes.

She was excited and exultant; in the dark her lips were smiling. She
wasn’t thinking; she was drifting, lost in an endless reverie, upon the
strength and beauty of this man. She was like poor Polly, playing
uncounted variations on one sole theme.

"I never felt this way before!" she reflected, with wonder. "I never
thought I _could_!"

But then she had never expected to meet a man like this, so entirely the
hero of her dreams. With her sad, worldly wisdom, she had expected so
little of love or of men. She had expected to be satisfied with some one
who would love her; she had never, in her pride, imagined a man whom she
could love. This noble and poetic soul was a shock to her, an amazement.
Her fancy dwelt upon his splendid figure, his bold face. She smiled
again, and then grew suddenly uneasy.

"No!" she said. "I don’t like it. I wish I didn’t. Him being married,
and all!"

For a moment she had an inchoate perception of life going by like that
wind outside, only not passing her, but bearing her with it. She knew
that this thing could not be stopped.

"Maybe I’d better go home," she thought. "I don’t want to get mixed up
in anything queer. Maybe I’ll go."

But that wasn’t genuine; retreat wasn’t in her soul. Her vague
uneasiness increased; she began thinking of Eddie and his books, and
those magnificent women.

"But all of them," she thought, "just went for the man they wanted, I
guess, and didn’t give a darn for anything else. Maybe that’s the best
way."

She dallied with the idea of reckless, overwhelming passion, but she
could not wholly accept it. There was something humiliating in caring so
much for a man.

There was a quiet little knock at the door. Angelica’s hand flew to her
heart; she didn’t stir. There was another knock, and still she didn’t
answer. Then, fancying she heard a footstep departing, she was seized
with an unreasonable panic, and flew across the dark room and stood
close beside the door.

"Who is it?" she asked.

"It’s I," said the voice she had longed for and dreaded.

"Well, what do _you_ want?" she asked, flippantly.

"I thought you’d like to take a walk in the garden," he said.

"Why? It’s too late!" she cried.

"Can’t we have a little talk?" he asked, plaintively. "Can’t I come in?"

She hesitated.

"I guess--you’d better not. I’ll see you in the morning. It’s so late
now."

"I didn’t think you’d care about such things," he said.

She saw that he was disappointed; that he found her tame, cowardly. She
unlocked the door and flung it open.

"But what on earth is there to talk about?" she asked, laughing
nervously.

And then and there and forever she lost her advantage over Vincent. For
that moment she was triumphant, indulgently amused by his eagerness,
mistress of the situation and of him, elated by the knowledge that she
was beloved and desired; but no sooner had Vincent really entered than
he dominated the situation. His big hand closed over hers. He bent over
her and whispered in the darkness:

"I couldn’t sleep till I’d seen you again!"

"Well!" she said, with the same forced little laugh. "Here I am!"

He seemed in the dark to tower above her; his bigness, the resonance of
his deep voice, confused her.

"I couldn’t sleep without seeing you," he said again. "I had to know
that you were real. After you had gone, I thought I must have dreamed
you. You were so lovely, so wonderful, you came upon me so suddenly! You
_are_ real, aren’t you?"

Again she gave a stupid laugh.

"Tell me!" he said. "Are you the girl that I saw at the
dinner-table--the houri in yellow that I saw in my mother’s room?"

"Yes."

"And only to think!" he said. "I’ve been looking for you all my life
long, all over the world, and I find you here, under my own roof, when I
come home! Were you waiting for me?"

"I didn’t know there was any you," she said, simply.

"I knew there was you, though! I knew I should find you!" he cried. "Oh,
I’ve hungered for you and thirsted for you! I’ve been so restless and
unsatisfied! I couldn’t believe my eyes. I’ve found you, dear, beloved
girl!"

"But you don’t know me!" she protested, with an almost painful anxiety.
"Perhaps I’m not--as nice--as you think."

"I do know you! I know all your soul. I was born to know you and to
comprehend you. You are my sovereign, my most beautiful and adored lady.
I am your knight and your servant forever. I think I could faint with
joy for a touch of your dear hand!"

Tears sprang to her eyes, she was so moved by his words, by his ardent
and touching voice. She stood motionless, still with her hand in his;
but some tremor, some sign which his agile heart at once detected, must
have told him that his moment had come. He drew her close to him and
clasped her in a strong and tender embrace, her heart beating close to
his, while he stroked her soft hair.

"My little one!" he whispered. "My beloved little one! Madonna! Dear,
glorious angel!"

His voice broke in a sort of sob, and the hand smoothing her hair
trembled. He bent and kissed her cheek, kissed her again; then,
suddenly, his embrace tightened, and he pressed his lips against hers
with something quite different, something quite devoid of tenderness.
She struggled, pushed him roughly away.

"Don’t!" she said, sharply.

For she wanted it to stop there. She wanted this to be love, this
half-sad ecstasy, these stirring, heart-breaking words. She wished to go
no further. Perhaps the ghosts of dead mothers for ages back come to
beseech young girls, to entreat them in silent voices:

"Oh, do not, my daughter, for the love of God, do not become a woman!
Stop here! Let this suffice! For whatever little you may gain, you will
lose a hundred times as much. Draw back from this bitter, bitter
draught!"

"Kiss me!" he entreated, following her further into the room.

"No!" she said harshly. "Go away! Go out and close the door! Go away, or
I’ll call!"

He stopped at once.

"I thought you loved me!" he cried.

"I do," she said, with sublime honesty. "Only--I want you to go. Good
night!"




CHAPTER TWELVE


I

And here was Angelica, the very next afternoon, sitting once more in her
mother’s underground kitchen, with the teapot handy beside her on the
stove and a familiar blue and white cup and saucer before her; but the
kitchen was not as in the old days. Now it was all disorder and dirt,
the clock had stopped, the floor was unswept, the bright blackness of
the stove was lost in a grayish fuzz. The mistress--or, one might better
say, the servant--of this little domain, who had worked so valiantly to
preserve its decency, was lying ill in the adjoining bedroom.

Angelica had got a brief note from her that morning at the
breakfast-table:

DEAR ANGELICA:

     I am taken ill, and do not know how ever I shall manage. If you can
     spare the time I wish you would come.

                                                           YOUR MOTHER.

Angelica had shown this to Eddie, and he had at once ordered the motor
for her and given her twenty-five dollars for any urgent expenses.

"Get everything that’s necessary," he told her. "If she’s very ill, be
sure to get a nurse. Don’t overtax yourself. And here’s my office
telephone number; I’ll expect to hear from you this afternoon."

Angelica had got a doctor from the neighborhood. He had declared her
mother’s illness to be a sort of indigestion, and had ordered a
cessation of boiled tea, a strengthening diet, a number of medicines,
and a week’s complete rest; and now Mrs. Kennedy was enjoying the rest.

Angelica had set to work with terrific energy; had gone flying in and
out of the flat, using Eddie’s money to great advantage. She bought her
mother two new night-dresses, a bag of oranges, a drinking-glass--they
had had nothing but cups for a long time--and two new saucepans for
cooking the food she was to enjoy. Her last purchases had included
extension screens for the windows and a wire "fly-swatter," with which
she had pursued and deftly crushed every fly in the flat.

After lunch she intended to clean the rooms properly, to scrub, to
sweep, to dust, to wash. She rather looked forward to it. Her mother
wasn’t seriously ill, and she had had the extreme satisfaction of making
her happy and comfortable. She had left her lying neat and peaceful in
the dark little cell, with her hair brushed and braided and her mind at
peace.

Mrs. Kennedy had said that it was better than medicine to see her child
again, and it was--above all, to see her child so triumphantly happy.
Letters had told her very little, for Angelica was not good at writing,
and her brief notes had given her mother plenty of scope for anxiety.
She hadn’t thought it possible that her child had actually held her own
there among the rich people. She wanted to ask innumerable questions, to
talk at great length; but Angelica made use of the doctor’s
recommendation.

"He said for you to be very quiet and not talk much," she stated.

"You talk and I’ll listen," said her mother.

"No, that’ll excite you," Angelica replied. "You just keep quiet,
mommer, till you’re better."

She could not talk to Mrs. Kennedy; she felt absolutely obliged to go
off alone where she could think of Vincent. All the morning, even
through her great anxiety before she had got to her mother, all the
while she was working to make her patient comfortable, that delight had
glowed in her heart. She had scarcely closed her eyes the night before,
but she was not in any way tired. She was in a sort of continuous
rapture; she was filled with energy, vigour, an immeasurable good-will.

She rocked back and forth in the creaking old chair of which her mother
was so fond, and drank her tea, as it had been their custom to drink it,
black and bitter, with a parsimonious teaspoonful of condensed milk in
it. She smiled to think of the contrast between this sort of
tea-drinking and that at Buena Vista--the fine and delicate china, the
pale amber liquid, served with cream, crystal sugar, thin slices of
lemon, all sorts of biscuits and cakes, all the ceremony of the thing.
She felt that, after all, there was a tranquil sort of comfort in her
present state quite lacking in the other; not realizing that it was the
happiness in her heart which gilded all her surroundings.

She pictured Vincent and herself in a place like this, blessed outcasts
who had renounced everything, and had only each other. She imagined his
coming home to her, weary and pallid; she saw herself welcoming him,
smiling, proud, brave through any suffering, her ambitions all
renounced, all her hope in him. She fetched a pail of water and a
scrubbing-brush and a cake of horrible yellow soap, and while she worked
bemused herself with a fancy that this was Vincent’s home, and that she
was working for him.

Because she so longed to see him, she felt sure that he would come. When
the door-bell rang, she sprang up from the floor she was scrubbing, and
ran just as she was, disheveled, in her wet apron, to let him in.

She met the troubled regard of Eddie.

"How is your mother?" he inquired, staring and staring at this joyous,
untidy creature.

"Better," said Angelica.

She was friendly, very well-disposed toward Eddie, and yet, at this
moment, irritated by him because he wasn’t Vincent. Really she didn’t
want to see him. She remained holding the door half open, and hoping
that he would go, but he stood there for some time, frowning a little
and biting his little yellow mustache in silence.

"Do you mind if I come in?" he asked at last.

"No, of course not! Come on in, if you want; only mommer’s in bed----”

"I wanted to see you alone," he said, his frown deepening to a scowl.
"May I?"

Her heart sank. It was surely something about Vincent--a reproof, an
accusation, perhaps dismissal. She led the way into the tiny parlour,
black as a dungeon, and with barred windows, too; took off her apron and
threw it, a sodden bundle, out into the hall. Then she sat down
defiantly before him.

"Well?" she demanded.

Eddie waited for a moment.

"I’ve been thinking," he said at last. "About you. A lot. Especially
last night. If you’ve got time to spare, and if you’ll listen----”

"Go ahead! I’m listening."

She was still defiant, because she expected a rebuke, and she was well
aware that there was quite enough cause in her conduct to merit severe
reproofs. He was so serious, so disturbed, that she believed him to be
disappointed in her, and she resented that.

"Well?" she said again.

"It’s this," he said. "I--I wish I could make you believe that I’m not
selfish in this. I wish I had some way of making you believe that I’m
really thinking of _you_, first of all. You seem so--solitary,
so--unprotected. Of course, I know you’re very self-reliant, and all
that, but still, you’re only a young girl, after all."

"I can take care of myself," she said sullenly. "I suppose you mean you
don’t like the way I’ve been acting. Well, I----”

"No!" he cried impatiently. "What nonsense! No! What I mean is--I think
you’d better marry me."

"Oh, Gawd!" cried Angelica, astounded.

Eddie’s face grew scarlet.

"Why shouldn’t you?" he said.

"But----”

"I’ve--I can offer you--I have a good income," he went on, angry and
embarrassed. "I own Buena Vista, with a small mortgage on it. I have
something invested, and I’m earning plenty. I’m doing well. I’ll be a
rich man before long."

"Yes, I know; but----”

"And--I think I’d make a good husband. I admire you so much--I can’t
tell you how much! I think you’re--wonderful. You haven’t a penny, you
haven’t any family, any position----”

"Now, look here!" she interrupted, threateningly.

He hastened to repair his lack of tact.

"I’m only mentioning that to show you that I think that you--just
yourself--are worth more than any other woman on earth. It seems to me
you have all the qualities I’ve always admired--pride, and spirit, and
ambition, and strength--and then you’re so beautiful. I--really,
Angelica, if you would marry me, I could do _anything_. I’m only
twenty-nine, you know."

"Oh, I thought you were much older!" said Angelica, glad of any
distraction from this awful topic.

To her amazement, Eddie sprang to his feet and looked down at her, quite
pale with anger.

"No doubt!" he cried. "No doubt you looked on me as a dull, tiresome,
middle-aged man. You’re like all women--you _must_ have a handsome
man--any fool with a handsome face, who’ll make you fine speeches! If
I’d go down on my knees and rant and rave like a damned actor--but I
won’t! I’m not that sort. I tell you, in a straightforward way, that
I--I ask you to marry me. I’m--I’ve got nothing to be ashamed
of--nothing! One or two little things in the past--but nothing serious.
I mean, no one can reproach me. I’ve never harmed any one."

"Oh, I know it!" she cried. "It’s not that. I know you’re good--too good
for me. I think an awful lot of you, Mr. Eddie. Only----”

"Only what?"

"I couldn’t!"

"Now, see here, Angelica, I haven’t much time. I’ve come away in the
very middle of my office hours to--settle this. I can’t work, I can’t do
anything until this is off my mind. It’s--_don’t_ be unreasonable,
please, Angelica!"

"I’m not, Mr. Eddie; but--I just can’t!"

"Do you mean," he said, "that I’m--distasteful to you?"

That was his weak point, his sorest spot, this sense of his own
unattractiveness, his unpopularity. He had labored too long under
disadvantages too crushing; he couldn’t acquire the self-respect to
which his qualities entitled him. He had never been loved, not even by
his own mother, and he could not destroy a conviction, persisting from
childhood, that he was in some mysterious way unlovable and repulsive.

He turned away abruptly.

"Very well!" he said. "I understand. I’ll go. Good-by!"

"No! Don’t! It’s not that. You’re _not_ distasteful!" she cried.
"Honestly, you’re not--not a bit! I think an awful lot of you. I think
you’re--grand. I do, really; but I’m just not in love with you. I can’t
help it. It isn’t that you’re not handsome, or anything like that."

She was moved by his wretched, pallid face. She wanted very much to
reassure him as to his desirability and attractiveness. She wanted him
to know of her admiration and her great good-will; but she knew no way
of saying all this. She caught his hand and squeezed it; and when he
turned, she looked up at him with those wonderful black eyes, troubled,
filled with tears.

"But can’t we keep on being good friends?" she asked.

He forced himself to smile down at her in his old kindly way--or as
nearly that as his drawn face would allow.

"I’ll try," he said. "Good day!"


II

Mrs. Kennedy wished to have all this explained to her.

"Who was it, Angie?" she asked.

"It was Mr. Eddie--him that owns the house," said Angelica.

"What did he want?"

"Oh, nothing!"

"Angie, tell your mother, deary. What made you cry?"

"I don’t know. I was nervous, I guess."

Her mother sighed.

"If you’ve made up your mind not to tell me--You know your own business
best, I dare say; only, Angelica, I hope there’s nothing wrong about
it--nothing that’s what it shouldn’t be?"

"No! If you really want to know, he wants to marry me."

She couldn’t conceal a sort of pride. After all, it _was_ something!

Her mother was not garrulous, but this she couldn’t stop talking of; she
couldn’t have enough of Eddie, no detail was too trivial. She wanted to
have a complete description of his person and of his life.

But Angelica’s reception of his proposal she didn’t mention. She saw
that there was something a bit strained in that quarter, something which
talking might make worse, so she held her tongue, confident that it
would end right enough. A girl’s whim! She knew her daughter; Angelica
was far too sensible and shrewd not to take advantage of such an
opportunity. She permitted herself to dream of a future for her child
glorious beyond all her former hopes.

For herself she expected nothing. She knew--none better--what there is
of gratitude in this world. She trusted her child, knew that she would
never forget or neglect her, but she knew also that Angelica was likely
to rise where she never could follow. There would be a pension, no
doubt, but no real share in any future grandeur for Mrs. Kennedy,
scrubwoman, janitress, and martyr.

Her dreaming was disturbed, however, and her happiness turned to
uneasiness by the arrival of a second man that night. She heard the bell
ring and her daughter hasten to the door, and then come back again.

"Mommer, do you mind if I go out for a little while?" she asked.

"Who with, Angie?"

"A feller," said Angelica. "I’ll be back inside of an hour, sure. Will
you be all right?"

"What fellow?"

"A new beau," Angelica told her, laughing. "By-by, mommer! Back soon!"

So joyous, so excited! It didn’t look well for Eddie.

"Now what in the world is that child up to?" Mrs. Kennedy thought.

In the meantime Angelica had reached the street with Vincent, and they
stood on the corner, irresolute. It was a sultry night; the street was
swarming with wretched and vicious life, evil smells, a pandemonium of
noise. Angelica, however, might have been standing in the golden streets
of paradise, or in the desolation of hell, for all she cared. She didn’t
notice, she didn’t really know, where she was.

Ever since she had opened the door and seen Vincent standing outside,
she had been quite beside herself. She waited on that malodorous corner,
looking up into his face with hungry eyes, waiting for his words, for
the sound of his voice. So much had she thought about that enchanted
love scene in the dark, so long had she dwelt upon Vincent’s words, his
appearance, that in this brief interlude she had been able to
accomplish that amazing and essential transformation of lovers--she had
changed the real man into the man she wished him to be.

She was dazed, stupid with the splendour of her own creation, of the god
whom she had made to worship. She was almost afraid of him. After all
her preposterously exaggerated day-dreams, it was necessary that she
should see in him a marvel, and of course she did see a marvel.

He wore a dark suit that fitted closely to his shoulders, and moulded
for the delighted eye his splendid figure, his perfectly proportioned
height. He was powerful and at the same time graceful, and he carried
himself regally. In his rôle of poet, he wore a white shirt with a low,
open collar and a soft black tie, and he went with his hat in his hand,
the better to show his keen, vigorous profile, his fine head with its
rough, bright hair. Angelica felt that she would never grow tired of
looking at him, and yet in less than five minutes she grew restless
because he didn’t look at her.

At last he did, and smiled.

"Well?" he said. "What shall we do, eh?"

"Whatever you like."

"God forbid!"

"Why?" she demanded impudently. "What _would_ you like?"

"I’d like to kiss you, for one thing; but I won’t. Don’t be provoking,
naughty Angelica--I won’t make love to you!"

His tone was light and careless, and the smile he gave her she neither
understood nor liked. She was puzzled and hurt. What made him so
different? What was the matter?

"Suppose we walk?" he suggested. "This isn’t a very appetizing corner to
stand on. How is your mother?"

"Better," said Angelica in a surly tone.

"And you?"

"All right."

"I don’t know who else there is in your household, but I hope they’re
all quite well. Brothers and sisters----”

"Don’t be silly!" she said roughly.

"Angelica," he replied, "I’m not silly. I’m only trying to be decent.
You’re very young, very inexperienced. It’s hard to talk to you. I hoped
you’d understand without an explanation, but I don’t believe now that
you can."

She could have wept with chagrin and utter bewilderment. She saw that
she was being very stupid, and that she was disappointing her idol in
some way, but she couldn’t in the least comprehend how.

"You see," he went on, with an air of extreme patience and gentleness,
"all that--last night--it was very wrong. I blame myself severely. My
ideas about such things aren’t the usual sort, by any means. I don’t
parade it, but I’m a deeply religious man; and when I find myself giving
way to temptation as I did last night, I’m ashamed."

They went along in silence, down Seventh Avenue, to the entrance of the
park at One Hundred and Tenth Street. They entered here, and proceeded,
at the easy pace he had set, side by side, both looking ahead. All about
them in the warm dark were lovers, sitting close together on the
benches, walking hand in hand. There was a very atmosphere of love. And
Angelica must go on beside this man, who didn’t even turn his head to
look at her, who had nothing to say to her. He only quoted some poetry
which she neither liked nor understood, for it had nothing to do with
love; it was about the foreign people in the city and the hot weather.

She tried to lean upon her pride. Very well, if _he_ didn’t mind wasting
this precious and beautiful hour together, then neither would she; but
she couldn’t restrain a hoarse little sob that flew suddenly into her
throat.

Vincent stopped.

"Now, my dear child!" he remonstrated. "Don’t! You make it so hard for
me. It’s not kind."

She tried to stop weeping, but couldn’t at once. He laid a hand on her
shoulder and gently patted her.

"You mustn’t take it like this, my dear; or else I shan’t be strong
enough. Do you know why I came to-night?"

"I suppose--you wanted to see me."

"No, I didn’t. It’s only pain for me to see you. I can’t have you. I
mustn’t even think of you. I’ve got to give you up. I’ve got to stop
loving you."

"Can you?" she asked, with quivering lips.

"I must. I came to tell you so. You must forget all I said last night. I
shouldn’t be fit to live if I were to harm you. Angelica, what do you
think I am? Do you think I _could_ harm you? Do you think it’s in me to
do so brutal a thing, Angelica?"

She was effectually checked, her ardour destroyed. Nettled by his
assumption that only his nobility saved her, her pride came to the aid.
He needn’t talk of giving her up when he hadn’t got her!

And, ignorant as Angelica was, a novice in love, she was able to
perceive a certain falseness in his attitude. This was not the
renunciation of a man who loved her better than himself. It was
something different, which she didn’t understand, and which displeased
her.

She had such a feminine longing to be captured and compromised that she
couldn’t even imagine the motive which just then ruled Vincent--that
powerful instinct of the male to escape entanglements; but her fresh and
fervent spirit was able by instinct to perceive his staleness. Mystery
as he was to her, she nevertheless felt, with perfect justness, that at
that moment he cared nothing at all for her.

"Let’s turn back!" she said. "I told mommer I wouldn’t be gone long."

He made no objection. He took her back to her own door and stood hat in
hand to wish her a good night.

"Angelica," he said, "I think you will thank me some day."

She didn’t reply, only turned and left him, and went into the flat.

Her mother was asleep, and everything was quiet. She sat down in the
dark kitchen near the barred window, where a beam of light from a flat
overhead, across the court, fell upon her.

"Well!" she said. "_That’s_ over, I guess!"

An awful sense of frustration swept over her. That all this should stop
before it had fairly begun; that this beautiful love should be stamped
out--intolerable! It was not in her nature to submit; there was no
resignation in her. She could not bear to be thwarted here, at the
threshold of her life, at the very beginning of the adventure to which
she had always looked forward.

She cried fiercely to God that she didn’t love this man, that he wasn’t
the one for whom she had longed. She _wouldn’t weep_! If she could, she
would have torn out of her body that treacherous heart which so belied
her pride.

"All _right_, my lad!" she said. "All _right_! You won’t find it very
hard to give _me_ up!"

She lighted the gas and sauntered about the kitchen, eating whatever she
saw--bread and biscuits, with a little cold tea that was in the teapot.
She even whistled softly to herself.

Mrs. Kennedy waked up, and Angelica went in to see what her mother
wanted. She strictly discouraged conversation, however, and questions.

"Don’t talk, mommer. It’s too late. Go to sleep now. I’m coming to bed
myself right away. I’ll put out the light and get undressed in the dark,
so you can get to sleep."

Which she did. Her mother heard her moving adroitly about, heard her
brushing her hair, and, at last, the wild shriek of a spring cot, bought
second-hand the day before.

For half an hour Angelica lay quite still; then suddenly she sat up.

"_You!_" she whispered, with a sob. "_You!_ You go to hell! I don’t
care!"




CHAPTER THIRTEEN


I

Angelica was surprised at getting a letter the next morning, for she
never got letters. The writing was necessarily unfamiliar, as there was
none that would not have been. She opened it.

"Angelica, beloved girl!" it began. "I can’t do it!"

"Why, my Gawd!" she whispered. "It’s from _him_!"

     I can’t give you up! I tried--God knows I did, but I can’t! I can’t
     think of consequences, of honour, of anything but this heavenly
     madness that is destroying me. Even if I lose my soul, even if it
     brings ruin and misery upon you whom I worship, I must have you,
     Angelica! Oh, come back to me! Come back to me! The farce is over.
     I have played my rôle of prudent, honourable man of the world. Here
     I am now, without reserve, without the smallest shred of worldly
     wisdom, without conscience, without civilization; nothing, my
     Angelica, but a man!

                                                Nothing but your lover,
                                                               VINCENT.

She was wild with joy. She set to work with terrific energy, the letter
crushed inside her blouse. She insisted upon finishing the ironing which
Mrs. Kennedy had tried to do for a tenant before she became ill. She
stood over the ironing-board singing in her rather husky voice.

Nothing but a misunderstanding, after all! He did love her, he had only
tried to do what was right. She felt a profound pity for him, her poor
poet, who had done his very best to protect her, until love overwhelmed
him.

"You _bet_ I’ll go back to him!" she said to herself.

Her mother was alarmed. She saw--who could help it?--the exaltation of
her child, and she wished to know the cause. Poor woman! She feared joy
with all her soul.

"Who was that other man you went out with last night, Angie?" she asked.

"Oh! The brother of the other feller."

Her mother reflected.

"You seem to like him better," she said at last.

"Yes, I do."

"Is he nice?"

"Yes, he is."

"But you’re not----?"

"I don’t know, mommer!" she answered, laughing.

"Deary! I wish you’d _tell_ me!"

"There’s nothing to tell."

"But, my deary, don’t be foolish. Don’t be hasty! Try to find out if
he’s--a good man, before you let yourself think about him. _Is_ he a
good man, Angie?"

"He’s a good-looking one, anyway," Angelica answered flippantly. "Now,
mommer dear, please don’t worry about _me_. I’m not a fool!"

"But you’re young, Angie, and you’re very hasty. I do worry about you.
You never tell me anything. You won’t listen to me."

Angelica, with that letter next her heart, was patient.

"I do listen to you, mommer. Now, do you want a glass of milk?"

She was patient, because she was indifferent, because for the first time
in her life she didn’t care about her mother, didn’t care what Mrs.
Kennedy thought or how she felt. She wanted, in fact, to get away from
her, to be quite free and not bothered by questions.

"Shall I go back to him now?" she thought. "This instant? Just like I
am?"

But that, though splendid, wouldn’t do, and couldn’t be arranged; so she
sat down to write him a letter. It took her no more than a minute to
finish it, for this was all that she wrote:

     I will come back to you. I love you, too.

                                                                   Your
                                                              ANGELICA.

The telephone rang--that hateful telephone in the dark outer hall, under
the stairs. This was one of the "modern conveniences" of the
apartment-house, and it was her mother’s duty to attend it, and by
screaming, by ringing the down-stairs bells, or, when they were broken,
by toiling up the stairs, to apprise the tenant whom it summoned. They
both hated the thing. When it rang, they would sigh, "Oh, that
telephone!" and go wearily to serve it.

It was a surprise and a great relief to hear Eddie’s voice on the
telephone, for Angelica had been half afraid that the etiquette
prevailing among rich people would prevent any further communication.
She wasn’t even sure as to whether or not she was expected to go back to
Buena Vista. But Eddie wasn’t that sort. His voice was just as it had
always been--official, but quite kindly.

"Hello!" he said. "How’s your mother?"

"Much better."

"That’s good! Then have you any idea when you’ll come back to us,
Angelica?"

"In a week. Next Saturday, the doctor says."

"Good! I’ll call for you next Saturday afternoon, when I leave the
office. And I say, Angelica, don’t you want Courtland to bring you some
of the things you left at our place?"

"I _would_ like a few of them," she answered, gratefully.

And the busy, harassed Eddie, sitting in his office, with impatient men
waiting to see him, with his stenographer pen in hand beside him, with a
telegraph-boy behind him who required a reply, in the midst of the
rattle of typewriters, the ringing of telephone-bells, the clicking of
the ticker, hoarse, excited voices, all this frenzied life which he had
caused to exist and directed and sustained--he took time to write down
at Angelica’s dictation a list of things she had left behind her in his
house.

It touched him, that list, it was so obviously the list of a poor
person--things that he, or any one he knew, would have bought duplicates
of without a second thought; things one would hardly bother to pack. He
got them together himself when he reached home that evening--a
tooth-brush, a cake of perfumed soap, a half-empty box of cheap
writing-paper, hairpins, a nail-brush.

Courtland brought them that evening, much against his will. Who was she
to have her wretched little belongings sent down to her in a motor-car?
He was obliged to assert himself, to proclaim his independence and his
superiority. He stood outside the door with his finger on the bell so
that it rang in one long, maddening clamour, and he kicked at the door.
He made an outrageous noise.

Angelica came flying down the hall in a fury, and flung open the door.

"What do you mean?" she cried. "Where do you think you are, anyway?"

Courtland stared at her for a minute. Then, making an imaginary
lorgnette of his thumb and forefinger, he peered through it, bending
forward from the waist in a preposterous and unseemly attitude.

"Aeoh!" he exclaimed, in a simpering voice. "I beg your pawdon, I’m
suah! I forgot myself, really, don’tcher know! If you will kindly permit
me to enter this mansion, I will deliver to you this package of jools
sent by the dook!"

"Give it to me and shut your mouth," said Angelica.

"What’s all this?" called Mrs. Kennedy from her bed. "Who is it, Angie?"

"Only the chauffeur. He brought some of my things," her daughter
answered in a contemptuous tone.

There was something about her child’s words and tone that jarred upon
Mrs. Kennedy. She came out of the bedroom in her new flannel wrapper,
and addressed Courtland with ceremonious politeness.

"I’m sure we’re very much obliged to you," she said. "Won’t you step in?
Maybe you’d take a cup of tea, and rest a few minutes?"

"Rest!" said Angelica. "He never does anything else!"

Courtland ignored her.

"I don’t care if I do," he said to Mrs. Kennedy, and followed her into
the kitchen, where he sat down heavily on the step-ladder chair. "I’m as
tired as a dawg," he said, with his invariable air of grievance. "It’s
enough to make you sick--driving that woman all over the country. No
more consideration, she’s got, than a--than a dawg!"

"Well," said Mrs. Kennedy, "I suppose that’s what you’re paid for."

"I know it!" he agreed, plaintively. "That’s all right; but then what
does she want to be telling me I’m too good to be a chauffeur for? She
says there’s lots of fellows in college hasn’t got my brains. And this
golf! There she’s got me the bag of clubs that cost Gawd knows what, and
she just started showing me the way to use them. She said I was doing
fine, and then, all of a sudden, she dropped it, and never said another
word about it. I waited. After a while I began putting the bag of clubs
in the car, to remind her. No, not a word! So I says to her to-day,
‘What about this here golf?’ And she says, with that grin of hers, ‘Oh,
I hawdly think it’s worth while going on. I’m afraid it was a
mistake’--and tells me I can sell the clubs!"

"What of it?" inquired Mrs. Kennedy. "They’re no good to you. I can’t
see any sense in your learning to play golf. I can’t see what you have
to complain of."

"Oh, it’s the way them rich people pick you up and then drop you that
makes me sick! Who is _she_, anyway? An old----”

"You shouldn’t say that!" said Mrs. Kennedy, severely.

She was well enough used to bad language not to be shocked, but she was
displeased.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," said Angelica, "after all she’s
done for you."

"I don’t want her to do nothing for me. I want her to let me alone.
Listen here--you wouldn’t stand up for her if you knew the way she talks
about you. I had the two of them out the other day, and they were
fighting about you all the time. _She_ said you was no good, and she
guessed you’d stole things off her; but Mrs. G., she says no, you’re all
right. Then _she_ says you’d make trouble in the house, and Mrs. G.
says, ‘Well, ain’t there enough trouble there anyway? What do we care if
we get a little more? _I_ want her back,’ she says. ‘All right,’ says
the old lady, ‘have her, if you want her, but don’t kick if you find
your hus----’”

Angelica had grown scarlet.

"My Gawd, what a lot you talk!" she said. "You better be starting home."

He eyed her with resentment.

"I’ll go!" he said. "Don’t you worry!"

After Courtland had gone, Mrs. Kennedy attempted to reprove her daughter
for her bad manners, but Angelica insisted autocratically that she must
go to bed at once.

"You shouldn’t get up at all," she told her mother.

"The doctor said it wouldn’t hurt me--just around the flat."

"Not at night! You’d ought to know better. You ought to be asleep by
this time. Now, listen here, mommer!" she added firmly, as she saw signs
of rebellion. "If you don’t do what I say, I’m not going to stay and
take care of you. The doctor said _rest_. Well, this isn’t rest. You got
to go to bed this instant!"

So did she rid herself of the necessity for talking, for listening, for
recognizing the external world. She was irritable at the very least
disturbance; her joy had gone, and left a bitter impatience. Five days
before she could go back to that enchanted house where Vincent lived,
to be again under the same roof, sitting at the same table! Five days
lost out of life, out of her best years!

She was a little surprised and rather pleased at her own lack of
morality. She really didn’t care a bit, didn’t feel in the least shocked
or distressed, at loving a married man; nor did she hesitate for an
instant at the prospect of going off with him. She believed that was
what he meant; very well, she was ready!

She would leave her poor little mother desolate, she would humiliate and
affront the kindly Polly, she would leave Eddie overwhelmed by disgrace
and grief, and still she didn’t care. She was deceiving her mother,
deceiving Polly, shamefully deceiving Eddie, and she didn’t care. On the
contrary, she was rather proud of it. She felt that such insolent
wickedness had in it more than a little magnificence of the sort
possessed by the magnificent women of the past.

Oh, the world was well lost for Vincent, her poet lover! She read his
letter again and cried over it--she who had shed so few tears in her
life.


II

But in spite of all her hardihood, her pride in her love, she couldn’t
help feeling a great dread of Eddie. She didn’t like to face him. She
had a silly idea that by merely looking at her he might know all that
her heart contained; and although he so much admired magnificence, she
had no delusion as to his admiring this!

She got ready on Saturday afternoon in a state of great nervousness that
subdued even her eagerness to be with Vincent again. She hadn’t seen
either of the brothers for the past five days; Eddie had telephoned
every day, but there had been no word at all from Vincent.

That didn’t trouble her, however. She felt that she and Vincent
understood each other absolutely, no matter how long or how far apart
they were. Just as she thought of him, he thought of her, longed for
her. Her only trouble was this dread; if only it were not Eddie who were
taking her to him! It seemed to cast a shadow upon the boldness and
beauty of their love to dupe a creature so blameless and so generous as
Eddie.

He was late. It had grown dark, and the lamp in the parlour was lighted,
and she and her mother sat in there, talking--a word now and then, and
long, long silences. They had nothing to say to each other. Angelica’s
heart had flown forward to meet her lover, while her mother’s brain
struggled wearily with the problems of the minute, of the next week, of
some one’s ironing, some one else’s scrubbing, of whether she were going
to earn enough to keep herself from getting ill again. They were
effectually separated now.

Came a brisk ring at the bell, and Mrs. Kennedy went to open the door.

"Come in, sir!" Angelica heard her say.

"Mrs. Kennedy?" replied Eddie’s voice. "I hope you’re better?"

"Thank you, sir, I’m quite well again. Won’t you step in?"

Angelica greeted him with an uncertain smile; she didn’t know what his
attitude would be. But he was certainly not vexed, or cold, or
suspicious; he was simply excited, not himself.

"Well!" he said. "I’ve done it!"

"Done what?" she asked.

"I’ve enlisted."

"You’re going to the war?"

"Yes."

"But I thought you didn’t approve of it. You said it was beastly, and
everything."

"Yes, I do think so; but----”

He hesitated, frowning. He didn’t know how to explain; didn’t, as a
matter of fact, honestly wish to explain. His motive in going was purely
selfish; he hoped in battle to make more of a man of himself, to glorify
himself. It was the same impulse which sent him to historical books and
to tremendous days of work--his earnest, priggish, sublime desire to
perfect himself. He believed--like how many others!--that he would come
back from the war a new man.

"I think I ought to go," he said, and was immediately ashamed of this
self-righteous phrase.

Angelica, to tell the truth, was not much impressed by the war. It never
stirred or moved her much at any time. She felt neither belligerent nor
pacifist. She simply took it for granted. She was one of those peasant
natures for whom it is quite impossible to feel either love or hate in
the abstract. She could have hated with royal hatred a German who
molested her, but she had no ill-will toward a German who invaded
Belgium. And as for fine phrases about it, her rough and vigorous mind
rejected them all. Ought to go? Why ought he to go? Just what did he
expect to accomplish?

However, she didn’t say this, any more than she allowed the least hint
of her great relief to show. That was the first thought that crossed her
mind--how much better it would be if Eddie were away!

Mrs. Kennedy shook her head.

"It’s too bad!" she said. "Think of your poor mother!"

Eddie could find nothing to say to that.

"Suppose you should be killed?" Mrs. Kennedy went on, with a sort of
severity, as if she were speaking to a person who persistently sat in a
draft.

"It wouldn’t matter very much," said Eddie, with a faint smile. "Good
night, Mrs. Kennedy! Be sure to take care of yourself!"

Angelica followed him out and climbed into the car beside him. Those
last words of his had hurt her, had brought to her mind the thought of
his loneliness, and memories of his kindnesses and of his little, oddly
touching traits. She was pursued by a great remorse and a great regret.

"I’m _sorry_ you’re going!" she said, with a break in her voice.

"I know you are; but don’t be sentimental about it. I couldn’t stand
that. Be cheerful!"

"I’m not sentimental," she said, forcing her voice to be steady.
"Only--I think a lot of you. Every one’ll miss you."

"No!" replied Eddie. "No one will miss me, except perhaps you. No one
else at all, Angelica."

They were spinning along dark country roads now, and he could not see
her stealthy tears. She was thinking--wasn’t she perhaps a fool to let
him go?

"Oh, I am sorry!" she said again. "I wish I could have----”

"I know!" he said. "You can’t help it. I--don’t blame you. I’m not
lovable."

"You are!"

"No, I’m not. There’s nothing about me that a girl like you could fall
in love with. I know that with women that’s the chief thing--love; but
men are made of coarser stuff. Even if you didn’t love me, Angelica,
I--I wish you would marry me. I’m not boasting, but I could do a great
deal for you. If you could only hear how other men speak of me! I’m
doing bigger things in business--all the time. I--I know I seem like a
fool. Maybe I am, at home; but I’m not a fool in finance. I’ll be one of
the richest men in the country some day, Angelica."

"I never thought you were a fool. Indeed, I think you’re wonderful. I
think you’re--I’m sure you’ll do whatever you set out to do."

"But wouldn’t you like to help me? Things are so muddled and wasteful at
home now. If I had a wife like you, Angelica, to manage there for me,
while I’m away! I _need_ you so much!"

"Oh, deary!" she cried. "Please don’t! I’m so sorry, but I just can’t!"

He drove silently for a long time, until the lights of that home of
his--named with such Eddie-like pomposity--came into view. Then he said,
quite serenely and kindly:

"I’ll be your friend, anyway, Angelica--always!"




CHAPTER FOURTEEN


I

Angelica saw no one that night; but when she passed by the library, the
door was half open and she heard voices in there--an unusual thing for
that unsociable family.

Eddie went with her to the door of her room and wished her a good night,
but she did not have one. She slept fitfully, and she had heart-breaking
dreams. She felt confused and unhappy, awake or asleep. She couldn’t
shake off that dull remorse, or a certain sense of great loss which
haunted her.

She got up early, hoping that she might find Vincent and talk to him,
and arrange with him to put an end to this wretched, intolerable
situation. She couldn’t go on like this, in Eddie’s house, meeting him
every day. She felt sure that Vincent must feel this as she did, or
perhaps still more bitterly. She looked forward to it as an exquisite
relief, to pour out her heart to him, sure of his apprehension; sure,
too, that he would admire her fine feeling.

She was surprised, when she reached the breakfast-room, to see them all
at the table together--Polly and Mrs. Russell up and dressed hours
before their usual time; the doctor serious; Vincent in a neat dark suit
and a new air of decorum. He glanced up as Angelica entered, and smiled,
casually, the meaningless smile of his mother; then his eyes turned
away. It wasn’t a ruse; he wasn’t pretending to be indifferent; she
could see that he really _was_ so.

Polly made polite inquiries about Angelica’s mother, and then
they had finished with her, and returned to their own absorbing
preoccupation--the war.

In this one short week they had plunged into the war with fervour, led
by Vincent. They cared for nothing else. Mrs. Russell had organized a
tennis tournament for Stricken Belgium; her specialty was getting up
entertainments and recounting atrocities of a certain sort. Ordinarily
there were all sorts of fascinating subjects which one couldn’t discuss,
all sorts of the most interesting semi-medical details which were
unhappily tabu; but now, provided one told of it as done by a German,
one might say anything. Nothing was too degenerate, too shocking.

Polly spent much of her time in the Red Cross workrooms, rolling
bandages. She could do this with all her heart, without betraying a
secret pity she felt for Germany. She had lived there so long, and had
been so happy in her student days. She was convinced that the Germans
were very wicked, and that it was necessary to conquer them, but all the
same she was sorry for them; and she persisted in her firm hope that her
own country would never enter the war.

"Yes," she said, "I do sympathize with the Allies. I hope they’ll win.
I’m glad and willing to help them; but I’d rather see them lose than to
see any of our own boys killed!"

She kept to herself the horror she felt at the idea of some nice
American boy killing one of those magnificent, insolent German officers
she had always so admired.

Moreover, she didn’t like the English. She had all the resentment, all
the prejudices, of her little Ohio town against that lordly race. It
wasn’t Vincent’s fantastic Irish hate; it wasn’t really hate at all,
simply a stubborn dislike. She found a compromise, as he did, by a
preposterous worship of all things French. They were apparently fighting
the war alone against overwhelming numbers of Germans, somewhat hindered
by a small and very stupid British army.

Vincent gave a sort of inspired dissertation upon the French, which
deeply moved his family but failed to move Angelica. She was too stunned
by this change of atmosphere. She was of no significance now; she wasn’t
useful, she wasn’t interesting. No one--not even Vincent--gave her
another glance; and Eddie, her steadfast friend, wasn’t there.

But the greatest blow of all was Vincent’s attitude toward Polly, his
friendly deference, their air of complete harmony. She watched them, saw
them exchange smiles and glances, listened to their familiar talk.

He left directly the meal was finished, and Polly went up-stairs to put
on her hat.

"I’m going to work all morning," she said. "You can come with me and
roll bandages, or, if you’d rather, you can stay at home and trim that
hat for me."

"I’ll stay home," said Angelica.

But Polly lingered, inexcusably, to talk about Vincent--how Vincent and
she went to this meeting, how Vincent and she said this, how Vincent and
she thought that. They both knew that this was nothing more or less than
crowing. Polly had vanquished Angelica. She had got him back!

Of course she had no actual information as to his philandering with her
companion, but she had observed, she had put two and two together. She
had never suspected actual wrongdoing; she didn’t imagine, somehow, that
there was anything in Angelica’s conduct to blame. She simply thought
that Vincent had too much admired this lovely young thing, and that
Angelica had had her head turned by the flattery of his attention. She
felt justified in pressing her advantage.

Angelica endured it stoically. She wouldn’t show even any interest. She
listened to this talk of Vincent with rude inattention, and even went so
far as to yawn.

"He is wonderful," said Polly. "He’s organized a sort of club--the
Friends of France--men that can’t go themselves, but pledge themselves
to get recruits. He says the war has stirred his faith. I’m very glad.
He’s doing wonderful work!"

"Why don’t he enlist, like Mr. Eddie?"

"My dear, he’d never serve under the British flag. Eddie’s in the
Canadian service. Vincent’s Irish, you see."

"Well, isn’t Mr. Eddie the same as he?"

"Oh, yes, I suppose so; but he’s a different sort of Irishman."

"Well, why don’t he serve under the French flag, then, if he’s so fond
of it?"

"He can do more good as he is. There are plenty of men who can fight,
but there are very few who have Vincent’s wonderful eloquence."

"He said he was crazy to go," said Angelica; "but I notice he doesn’t."

"He’s married, too, you must remember," said Polly. "That makes a
difference. Married men aren’t supposed to go till the very last."

Their eyes met.

"Take him!" said Angelica’s glance. "_I_ don’t care!" But after Polly
had gone, she took out Vincent’s letter and read it again. She couldn’t
understand it! She felt bruised, and weary, and sick at heart, and
baffled. A letter like that, entreating her to come back to him, and,
when she came, to find him on the best of terms with his wife and quite
indifferent to her!

"But perhaps later, when we’re alone," she thought, "he’ll say
something."

But all that day, and that evening, not a word, and the next day, too,
until it grew plain to her that he didn’t intend to see her alone, that
he was avoiding her.

So the next morning she wrote a note and slipped it under his door:

    I want to see you.

He made no sort of answer; he went on all day as if she didn’t exist; he
wouldn’t even meet her eye. When he wasn’t going out in the motor to
make speeches for the Friends of France, he was sitting in Polly’s room,
telling her what he had said at the last meeting and what he was going
to say at the next one.

But Angelica was not to be disposed of so simply. She made up her mind
that he would have to speak, he would have to tell her outright that he
didn’t love her.

"He won’t find it hard to get rid of me!" she thought, bitterly. "But
he’s got to _say_. I want to understand. What does he write me a letter
like that for, and then be this way?"

She had a feeble little hope that perhaps it was only his feeling of
duty that kept him from her, that he loved her and didn’t dare to see
her. She felt that if he would just say that he loved her, but that they
must give up all thought of each other, she would be satisfied. She
could go on living, if she had that knowledge. _Something_, however, he
must say.

On the third evening she lay in wait for him. Polly and Mrs. Russell had
gone to bed, and he hadn’t returned yet from a lecture he was giving in
the village; so she turned out the light in her room and sat in the
dark, with the door open, waiting.

It was a melancholy October night. The leaves from the linden rustled
against her window as they were blown from the branches, and a constant,
monotonous, low wind blew, with a sound like rain. She sat as still as a
spider in a web, grim, unhappy, filled with apprehension.

In the course of time he came in. She saw him hurry down the hall in his
wet ulster and cap, and go into his own room. She was after him before
he had time to close the door.

"I want to speak to you!" she said. "Why didn’t you let me? Don’t you
want to see me?"

"No," he said. "No, Angelica, I don’t." He hadn’t even removed his cap.
He put his hand on the knob of the door. "You shouldn’t have come here,"
he said. "Some one might see you."

"I don’t care! I want to know. What’s the matter? What’s happened?"

"I hoped," he said quietly, "that you’d let it drop without an
explanation which is bound to be painful for both of us."

"I want to know where I stand. I want you to _say_."

"Sit down," he said. "I suppose we’ll have to have it out."

She did sit down, and waited while he took off his wet things, brushed
his hair, and put on a smoking-jacket. She was interested by his room;
for a few moments it distracted her unhappy heart. It was a curious room
splendidly furnished in black and gold enamel. There was a sort of
Chinese idea about it, shockingly adulterated by European luxury; long
mirrors, armchairs upholstered in purple, great bookcases, a black and
gray velvet rug on the polished floor, a marvelous lacquer screen
concealing the bed, a little stand on which was a tea-set of pale gray
porcelain with an odd black design. There were pictures on the
wall--shocking, startling things, obscene subjects in brilliant colours;
and in the corner a great ebony crucifix.

This exotic and voluptuous setting dismayed her. It proclaimed a Vincent
of whom she knew nothing, and whom she could never comprehend. How in
Heaven’s name was she to understand the poetic side of the man, she so
unpoetic, so crude? A man with tea-sets and crucifixes and such
pictures!

He sat down opposite to her in a low, cushioned chair, his head bent,
his hands clasped between his knees. Her foolish eyes could see, with
tears, that rough, bright hair, those fine, strong hands.

"Angelica," he began, not looking at her, "I’ve been a coward with you.
I’ve shirked this, because it is so intolerably hard to do."

She waited in anguish, with no idea of what she was to hear.

"You see, Angelica, the war has opened my eyes. I was--just going on,
lost in your beauty and loveliness, not thinking--drifting, drifting to
hell, and taking you with me. And then came this thing, this deafening,
colossal call to self-sacrifice, this monstrous revealment of the glory
and holiness of duty. I’m not callous. I couldn’t help but heed it. I
couldn’t go on in my old gross self-indulgence. Angelica!" he said,
looking up and meeting her eyes. "This war has brought me back to God!"

"But," she faltered, "what does----”

"It means that I must give you up. My love for you is a sin. For me, a
poet, slave and servant of beauty, you are temptation incarnate. You
can’t understand that. You are as cold, as pure, as an angel. You don’t
realize what love like mine is."

"I’m not!" she cried, pitifully. "I do understand! I’m not cold!"

"Compared to me you are. My love for you was madness. I couldn’t think
of anything else. It wasn’t the gentle affection you felt."

"I didn’t feel a gentle affection!" she cried, in tears. "You _couldn’t_
love me more than I love you!"

"Do you?" he asked, in a sort of stealthy triumph.

She didn’t see that. She was utterly sincere; and her beautiful
sincerity, her tears, suddenly moved him to one of those tempests of
remorse to which he was so prone.

"Oh, God!" he cried. "What a brute I am! I talk about giving you up, and
all the time I’m watching your face for signs of love. How can I find
the strength to let you go?"

"Don’t!" said Angelica, with streaming eyes. "Don’t let me go, Vincent
darling! Oh, if only we have each other!"

"We can’t have each other. It’s a sin!" he said. "Don’t you _see_? Oh,
Angelica! Beautiful Angelica! Why don’t you help me? Why do you try to
draw me down, and ruin me, and destroy me?" He sprang up, his fine face
distorted with grief and passion. "You don’t know!" he cried. "Oh, my
God! I have sinned! I have sinned! You don’t know after what sufferings,
what weary wanderings, I have come back to God! You cannot imagine!
There is nothing I have not done; no infamy I have not committed!"

And then he began his awful catalogue. He told her of his sins, his
vices--vile enough in reality, but exaggerated by his hysteria. He had
no medium between ingenious self-excuse and the wildest self-accusation.
He took a monstrous sort of joy in his horrible recital. He remembered
incidents from his boyhood, of cruelty, bestiality, lust, drunkenness,
theft, every sort of dishonour.

"I’ve been in prison," he said. "No one knows. They thought I was in
Canada that year. I’ve stolen from my own wife and spent the money on
vile women. I’ve been kicked out of disreputable hotels."

It went on and on, a nightmare, things that Angelica had never imagined,
all told in his coarse and vivid language which impressed his images
upon her mind forever.

"Good God!" he cried. "I’m appalled! How can even the God of mercy
forgive such things? Angelica! I am _lost_!"

He threw himself on his knees before her and buried his head in her lap.

"I have been in hell!" he cried. "What am I to do? God, who sees my
heart, knows that I repent; but is it enough?"

A feeling new to Angelica came over her, a divine kindliness and pity.
She stroked his ruffled hair, and tried, in her blindness, her
bewilderment, to find words to comfort him.

"Of course!" she said. "If you’re sorry, it’ll be all right. You can
start all over again."

With his head still buried, he flung his arms about her waist and began
to sob, hoarse, terrible sobs. She couldn’t bear it.

"Oh, don’t! Don’t, darling!" she cried.

He raised his head.

"I must be mad!" he said. "I’m so tortured. I long so, I yearn so, after
God. I want to be alone with Him, to contemplate Him forever, in
solitude--in a desert--to pray to Him--to make my songs to Him. Almost
all my verses are of God, Angelica. And then I see a lovely face--I
drink another glass of wine--I read a line of voluptuous beauty--and I
am lost again. How will it end? Oh, my merciful God, how will it end?"

She spent almost all the night trying to quiet and console Vincent. She
drew his head against her breast and kissed his forehead while she
talked to him. She found, almost miraculously, words and ideas which
gave him comfort, but with an effort which was torment for her. She had
a sensation of fishing in the depths of her mind, and painfully hauling
out some thought which she had not been conscious of having there. Her
love lent her insight; she discerned the grain of terror that lay
beneath the chaff of his theatrical eloquence. She was able to talk to
him with piety--she who had no religion, and had never given a thought
to such matters. She assured him that his repentance would wipe out his
sins.

"Why, Vincent!" she said. "_I_ could forgive anything you did; and you
know God must be more forgiving than me."

Steadfast, gentle, patient as an angel, she sat with him, listened to
his confessions, his self-accusations, and absolved him in her love. Who
could hold the man to blame for those faults which were his essence? Not
God--not she!


II

The clock had struck four. They were sitting side by side on the sofa,
both exhausted, pale, quite calm now. Vincent began to talk again, more
in his usual voice.

"Angelica," he said, "Eddie told me that he asked you to marry him, and
that you refused him."

"Of course I did, Vincent."

"It was a mistake, my dear. It’s the very best thing you could do--both
for yourself and for me."

"Oh, Vincent!" she cried. "I couldn’t! You know I couldn’t!"

"Angelica," he said, solemnly, "do it for my sake. Be my sister. I swear
to you that all base and sensual feelings have left my heart. I am
purged of all my lust."

Well, so he was, for the moment; but by weariness, not by religion. He
had talked himself into exhaustion.

"You couldn’t do better," he went on. "I’m not selfish, not jealous. My
wish is to see you happy, and you would be happy with Eddie. He’s a good
man."

He was, in fact, so worn out after his outburst that he felt compelled
to get rid of Angelica, not only for the present, but forever. He didn’t
recognize the feeling. He was conscious only of a great desire to
dispose of her, which he fancied was concern for her welfare.

"I want to see your life happy and blessed," he said. "I want to see you
with your children about you, you with your beautiful Madonna face. I
want always to be near you, but only to worship you. I will be your
brother, your friend. I long to see this, Angelica!"

"No," she said, "I don’t want to. It wouldn’t suit me. I’m not so crazy
about getting married, anyway."

"For me, Angelica! I beg you!"

"No, not even for you. I don’t want to, and that’s enough. I’m young,
Vincent. I have all my life before me. You needn’t worry about me." A
mortal weariness assailed her. "I guess I’ll go now," she said. "I’m
pretty tired. Good night, Vincent!"

He kissed her solemnly on the brow and opened the door for her. She shut
herself into her own room.

"Oh, Gawd!" she sighed. "_Now_ what? This is getting too much for me.
Can’t even think any more. I don’t know----”

She undressed and got into bed, though the sky had grown gray in the
east. She felt obliged to sleep, even if it were only for an hour; but
before she closed her eyes----

"One thing’s certain," she said. "I’m going away from here, right away.
I can’t stand any more of this!"




CHAPTER FIFTEEN


I

This one idea remained with her when she got up from her brief
sleep--this determination to get away. Except for this, she was drained
quite dry of all ideas, all feelings. She was not poetic; she hadn’t the
astounding variations of a poetic soul such as Vincent’s. She was not at
all easy to move, and when she was thoroughly aroused--to pity, to love,
to grief, to whatever it might be--it took a very long time for the
tempest to calm. She wanted now simply to get away alone, where she
might examine this turmoil in her heart.

She packed her bag, put on her hat and coat, and went to Polly’s room.

Polly was dressing in her very leisurely fashion, going to and fro in
the room, and stopping now and then before the table where her coffee
and rolls were laid. She was in petticoat and under-bodice, with her
thin, sallow arms and neck bare and her black hair hanging about her
face. She had a forlorn and jaded look--for which, however, Angelica had
no eyes.

"Mrs. Geraldine," she said, "I got to go. I want to go right
away--to-day. I don’t feel well."

"I’m very sorry, my dear! What’s the trouble?"

"I’m just tired. I’ve just got to get away. I want to go home."

"But if you’re not very well, wouldn’t you be more comfortable here?"

"No. I want to go home. I--you know how it is, Mrs. Geraldine, when you
feel you _just_ got to go home!"

Indeed Polly knew!

"For how long?" she asked. "You don’t think you’re really seriously ill,
do you? You think a little rest at home will set you up in a very short
time?"

Angelica hesitated a moment.

"I don’t think----” she began. "I don’t guess I’ll come back."

"Never?"

"No."

"But aren’t you happy here? Aren’t you comfortable? Tell me what’s
wrong, and perhaps we can arrange it."

"You couldn’t. I’m sorry, but I can’t stay--not for anything."

There was no mistaking Angelica’s tone. Polly saw that the girl was
absolutely determined and not to be turned--not without a long argument,
anyway, and that she had no desire to undertake. What is more, she had
too much sense to ask questions. She had a suspicion that her husband
was somehow concerned in Angelica’s going; there was probably a great
deal in this thing of which she decidedly preferred to remain ignorant.

She wasn’t jealous; that had worn off on that first evening of Vincent’s
home-coming. It had hurt her dreadfully, then, to see his glance turn
always away from her and toward this younger and lovelier face; but now
she didn’t care whether he was infatuated with Angelica or any one else.
She was pleased simply to be on friendly terms with him, to have him
agreeable instead of contemptuous, and she knew that was the best she
could expect.

She had not the slightest hope of winning him back; she didn’t even want
to very much. She was so tired; she dreaded the necessity which love
brings for effort--for keeping up, in appearances, in spirits. She
preferred that Vincent should never look at her at all, rather than to
have to endure his old critical glance. She was only too conscious of
her sad decline.

So there was nothing in her heart but real regret that Angelica was
going. She liked her very much, and was used to her.

"I’m very sorry to lose you," she said. "I’d hoped you were quite
settled here. I’ll miss you more than I can say."

"You’ve been very nice to me," said Angelica.

"And you must always remember me as a friend. If there is ever anything
that I can do for you, come to me. I mean it!"

She held out her hand, and Angelica gripped it.

"Good-by!" said Polly again. "And good luck! I hope you’ll let me know
how you get on."

"Yes, I will. But listen, Mrs. Geraldine--can I have my money?"

"Certainly! You’ll have to get it from Mr. Geraldine, though. He’s in
the library, writing."

Angelica was dismayed.

"No," she faltered. "I don’t want to bother him. If you’ll just give me
my train fare, you could send me the rest."

"My dear, I don’t think I have even enough for your fare. Mr. Geraldine
handles all my money for me."

She was a little ashamed of this arrangement, to which she had eagerly
agreed when she and Vincent were first married. It humiliated her to be
thus, without a penny.

"You needn’t mind disturbing him," she said. "He expects to do such
things for me. Come up and say good-by to me the last thing before you
go, won’t you?"

Angelica said "Yes," quite absently. She was thinking how this interview
with Vincent might be avoided. It was the thing above all others she
most desired to avoid. She had meant to go off quickly, to _get home_,
where she could think in peace, where she could try a little to remember
and to comprehend what had happened. She didn’t attempt to decide
whether or not she would ever see Vincent again; she knew only that she
did not want to see him _now_. But she was too well-trained in poverty,
and had too much common sense, to go off penniless, without even her
train fare, when there was honestly earned money due to her.

"Shall I wait for Eddie to come home?" she reflected.

No, that wouldn’t do at all. She wouldn’t know what to say to Eddie, how
to explain her leaving. She felt absolutely afraid to see him.

"I’ll just have to go to Vincent," she decided. "But _I’m going_! He
can’t stop me--I don’t care what he says!"

It took all her courage. She went down-stairs and into the library.
There he sat, writing, as Polly had said. He didn’t look up. She stood
in the doorway, waiting, for a few minutes; then she said:

"Mr. Geraldine!"

"Yes?" he asked, not looking up from his writing.

"Mrs. Geraldine told me to come to you and get my money."

"I can’t be bothered now!" he said irritably. "I’m busy. Can’t you see?"

"I’m sorry, but I’ve got to have it. I’m going."

"Going, Angelica?" he said, looking up at last.

"Yes. I want to catch the ten-forty. So if you’ll just give me my money,
I’ll go right away."

He resumed his writing.

"Too bad!" he said. "I really haven’t got it."

"Please don’t be so mean!" she cried. "For Gawd’s sake, give it to me,
and let me go!" Her fatigue and her distress at his callousness were
unnerving her. She felt ready to burst into tears. "Just give it to me
and let me go!" she said again.

"I haven’t it," said Vincent.

"You haven’t got any money?"

"Not a sou."

"But you can get it for me?"

He shook his head.

"No, my dear, dear girl. You’ll have to wait."

"How long--an hour?"

"I can’t say."

"But what do you mean?"

"I mean that I haven’t any money. I said so before."

"But Mrs. Geraldine said you had all her money."

"Then Mrs. Geraldine will have to be informed, very kindly, that her
income is mortgaged for the next two years. I had to do it. You see, she
has a little annuity, which she lets me collect. Well, I was
embarrassed. I had to borrow money against it. So, you see, that’s
_that_! She hasn’t anything; and I--I’m penniless as a gipsy. Now you
comprehend, I hope."

And to her amazement he began to write again.

"Say!" she cried. "This won’t do!"

"Don’t bother me, my dear girl. I’m at work," he said, frowning. "On a
poem."

"But you can’t put me off like this!"

"I’m writing!" he cried, in a sudden rage. "I don’t care about you and
your money. Let me alone!"

"You’ve got to stop writing, then. _I_ don’t care about you and your
writing. You’ve got to pay me!"

He sprang to his feet.

"Get out!" he shouted. "How dare you trouble me about your dirty money?
Good God! Lines such as I had, ready to put down, and to have them
ruined by a greedy, good-for-nothing little servant girl! I _have_ no
money. If I had, I wouldn’t give it to you. You don’t deserve it. Idling
away your time, aping your betters, draggling about in their cast-off
finery! If they weren’t both of them lazy and worthless themselves,
they’d have turned you out long ago. Get out!"

And he caught her by the arm and thrust her into the hall, slamming the
door behind her.

Angelica rushed up-stairs like a whirlwind and into Polly’s room,
panting, quite beside herself with fury.

"Him!" she cried. "He turned me out! Took me by the arm and shoved me
out into the hall! He----”

Polly had been putting on her hat before the mirror, but she threw it
down in haste, to give all her attention to this frantic young thing.

"What were you saying to him?" she asked, mildly.

"Nothing! Not a blame thing! Only just asking him for my money, like you
told me. Ah, he’s a fine feller, he is! The names he called me--and just
last night crying and saying he couldn’t live away from me!"

And she told all the story to Polly--even showed her Vincent’s letter.

"Now!" she said. "Give me my carfare, and I’ll go."

"I have nothing. Perhaps Mrs. Russell----”

But Mrs. Russell was out. Polly was in misery. There was this terrible
girl, demanding her money, implacably waiting for it, this girl whom her
husband had treated so shockingly. Her only wish in life was to be rid
of her.

"Take my ring," she said. "It’s worth ten times what you want."

"I can’t buy a ticket with it. I don’t believe you have any money, the
lot of you!"

Paradise was lost, her hopes destroyed, her pride mortally wounded; so,
having nothing to lose, she let herself go. She threw off all restraint;
she was as coarse, as fierce, as she wished to be.

Polly was wonderfully patient with the girl.

"You shall be paid," she said. "I’ll go down with you to Mr. Geraldine.
If he hasn’t any ready money, he’ll write you a cheque."

He still sat there writing. He paid no attention to them as they opened
the door and went in.

"Vincent!" said Polly. "Will you please write a cheque for Angelica at
once?"

Then he laid down his pen and looked at them for a long time in
contemptuous silence.

"I told her," he said, "just what I shall tell you. I have no money."

"But, Vincent, a cheque----”

He smiled, pulled a cheque-book out of his pocket, and wrote. Tearing
out a leaf, he handed it to Angelica. She stared at it.

"What do you mean?" she cried.

Polly looked over her shoulder.

"Please don’t joke, Vincent," she said. "Please give her what is due
her."

For he had drawn a cheque for ten thousand dollars.

"My dear Polly, any cheque I wrote would be equally ridiculous. There’s
nothing in the bank."

"Then where is it, Vincent?"

"I’ve told you. My investments----”

"But my income? Surely that----”

He began to show irritability.

"I tell you," he said, "that it’s all gone. Now, for God’s sake, my dear
soul, go away! Can’t you see I’m trying to write?"

"But my income----”

"Oh, you and your damned income!" he shouted. "You women and your
beastly greed! Haven’t you any soul? Can’t you think of anything but
money?"

"No, I can’t, Vincent, just now. It’s a very serious matter," said
Polly, gravely.

He jumped up with an oath.

"It’s disposed of for the next two years," he cried. "You left it to my
judgment. I’ve used my judgment. And now you come whining and sniveling
about your handful of pennies. By God, I’m entitled to it! The whole
thing doesn’t amount to what you cost me in a month--your clothes and
your----”

"Never mind that, please. Do you mean that we can’t pay Angelica?"

"Good God! Is your head made of wood? Or are you getting senile?"

Polly went on, as unheeding of his gross rudeness as a rock is of the
spray that dashes over it. Quiet and resolute, she pursued her
investigations. Her money was her life, her peace, her freedom, her
dignity; she knew that she could not earn any more, and that there was
no other man to give it to her. She must have it!

Angelica observed her with profound admiration. Even to further her own
best interests, even, she fancied, to save her own life, she couldn’t
have remained so calm, so self-controlled.

"Do you mean," she went on, "that we have nothing?"

"I do not! We have all sorts of things--paintings, books, your jewelry.
Simply we have no _money_. Now let me alone!"

"But what do you propose doing?" she asked. "We can’t go on, like this,
without a penny. How do you propose to pay Angelica?"

He raised his upper lip in a brutal sort of sneer.

"Oh, you don’t know, do you? Of course not! You’re perfectly innocent,
aren’t you? You never suspected, did you, who it was paid for the
clothes on your back? It’ll be such a shock to you, dear soul! In our
need we shall have to turn to Eddie! He’ll pay Angelica, he’ll pay me,
and he’ll pay you. God bless Eddie!"

That blow told. Polly winced under it. She turned away slowly and went
out of the room. Angelica followed her, and, looking back from the
doorway, she saw Vincent writing again.


II

Angelica had started an avalanche. She was deeply impressed and
interested. She had no desire to go now; she wished to see the
tremendous end.

Events moved with satisfactory speed. Polly went at once to Mrs.
Russell’s room, to find her just arrived at home from a Stricken
Belgium card-party. They closed the door; they were shut in there a long
time together. They must, of course, have summoned by telephone the two
unhappy and disturbed gentlemen who came in a motor-car later in the
afternoon.

When these came, they all went into the library, where Vincent still
sat. There was a dreadful scene. The newcomers were Polly’s lawyer and
the trustee of her first husband’s estate, and they at once attacked
Vincent. The trustee was non-legal and devoid of wise caution; he
shouted threats at Vincent, and Vincent cursed him in the voice of a
bull. He was beside himself with fury. The lawyer tried to frighten them
both into silence, but he was himself so appalled and outraged by their
ignorance of what was and what wasn’t libelous that his arguments were
weak.

Polly was distressed, but resolute.

"No!" she implored the raging trustee. "No, Frank, _don’t_, please! Only
find out just what has happened and see what you can save for me. Don’t
trouble to quarrel with him."

Vincent turned on her.

"Yes!" he screamed in a high, hysterical voice. "Yes! You’ll fight to
defend your _money_, at least! You don’t care about anything else. It
never pierced your damned self-satisfaction when I was off with other
women----”

"Vincent!" said his mother in a low, shocked voice.

"Very well! Very well!" he cried. "I don’t mind them knowing. I did take
her miserable little income and spend it on other women. For God’s sake,
who wouldn’t? Look at her! Do you think _she_----”

"Just tell him, please," said Polly to the lawyer, "that I intend to
leave him immediately and to obtain a divorce, and that he must give up
any authority he ever got from me."

"That will be arranged, Mrs. Geraldine," said the lawyer.

Suddenly Mrs. Russell began to cry.

"Oh, Polly!" she said. "Don’t give the poor boy up! Give him another
chance! Oh, do, do, do!"

She stopped suddenly. Vincent, too, stopped his violence and his curses.
Eddie had come in.

Eddie’s peculiar power had never before been so unmistakably
demonstrated. He had never before had such an opportunity for showing
how much of a man he was. He was master of the situation, master of
every one. He brushed aside the clamour, the furious arguments; he
wished only for information, and he knew how to get it.

He addressed himself chiefly to the lawyer, with now and then a question
to Polly. He listened carefully, and one could almost read in his face
the functioning of his just and clear mind.

Angelica watched him through the keyhole. This wasn’t _her_ Eddie, who
stammered in her presence, who could be roused by a single look from her
black eyes. Here was a man quite beyond her influence, immeasurably
superior to her, a man undeniably fine.

She listened to him speaking. He addressed Vincent with a quiet,
dispassionate sort of contempt; he told him that he would return to
Polly what Vincent had stolen from her.

"And I will apologize to you, too," he said to Angelica, when he came
out of the library, "for all this that you’ve had to go through here in
my house. I think you’re quite right to leave. If you’ll go up-stairs
now, I’ll talk the matter over with these gentlemen. You and I can
discuss it later."


III

So it was over. The house was quiet again, and they were all shut in
their several rooms. Angelica went to Polly’s door and knocked.

"It’s Angelica," she said. "Anything I can do for you?"

Polly’s voice came, after a long interval, faint and mournful:

"No, thank you!"

So then where should she turn but, naturally, to Eddie? She was very
unhappy. She felt ashamed of herself now, terribly lonely, banished, and
disgraced. Of course Polly would tell Eddie--perhaps already had told
him--all that Angelica had told her, all about that disgraceful affair
with Vincent, and she would lose, or perhaps already had lost, Eddie’s
regard. Just when she needed it so, when she had been so cruelly
repudiated by Vincent!

"Well, anyway, I want to see him," she said to herself. "Anyway, he
won’t fly out at me, even if he thinks I’ve been awful!"

She couldn’t find him for a long time. She wandered about the house like
a lost soul; and then at last she came across him on the veranda,
sitting there smoking, in the chilly October evening.

"Mr. Eddie!" she said softly, from the doorway.

"Oh! Yes?" he answered pleasantly. "Is it you, Angelica? Do you want
anything?"

"I just wanted to speak to you----”

"Shall I come in?"

"I’ll come out," she suggested, glad of the chance to talk in the dark,
and groped her way to the corner where she saw the light of his cigar.

"It’s a dark night," he said.

"It’s--sad out here," said Angelica. "So--damp, and all."

"There’s a big storm coming. I wanted to speak to you, Angelica. I’m
very glad you came. I wanted--I’ve some money that’s due you. You see,
I’m going away to-morrow."

"Going where?"

"To a training-camp--before I go to France, you know."

"Oh, dear!" she cried, with quite genuine dismay. "Oh, Mr. Eddie, I _am_
sorry! I hate to have you gone!"

"I don’t like to go," he admitted, simply. "And especially I don’t like
to leave you like this. I wish that it could have been different."

She waited a moment.

"I suppose I better be going to-morrow, too," she said.

"I suppose so. There’s nothing more for you here, Angelica. Polly’s
going away, you know, and----”

"Mr. Eddie!" she cried. "Tell me! Tell me, honestly, do you think I--it
was my fault? If you’d only please tell me everything they told
you--Mrs. Geraldine, and all! What did she say about me--and--that?"

"Polly?" he asked. "She didn’t say anything about you at all, except
that she liked you very much, and that she thought Vincent had behaved
very badly toward you."

"My Gawd!" said Angelica under her breath. "She never told him! He don’t
know a thing!"

"I don’t blame you at all," he said. "Not in any way. You lost your
temper--perhaps you lost your head a little--but you had great
provocation. You see, Angelica, Vincent came to me and explained the
whole thing. I must say he was very candid--and fine about it. He told
me frankly that he had tried to--mislead you, and that you refused to
listen to him; and that that was the reason he behaved so badly to you.
Of course, he _has_ behaved badly, all around,--shamefully; but
still--he has good points. I thought it was a--a plucky sort of thing to
do, you know, especially when we were on such bad terms. He said he
couldn’t bear to think of your being blamed in any sort of way."

Angelica was amazed and delighted that she had been made into a
persecuted heroine. She was filled with admiration for Vincent’s
nobility; and yet she could dimly perceive that there was something
behind it, that he gained something he wanted by this false confession.
It seemed a miracle that Eddie had been spared, both by him and by
Polly, those very facts which Angelica was so anxious for him not to
know.

"He said he was sorry for the whole thing," Eddie went on. "He begged
me to try to influence Polly to give him another chance. I couldn’t do
that. I simply said I’d tell her exactly what he had said, and what he’d
done. I did. I had a long talk with her; but she’s finished with him.
She didn’t say a word against him, but--she’s finished with him."

"But is it that--about me? Is that the reason she’s leaving him?"
Angelica asked, with anxiety.

"No! As far as that goes, there are plenty of things far worse--in that
_line_, you know. No! I think it’s chiefly about the money. She says she
couldn’t trust him again. She says it’s impossible to live with him
under such conditions. I suppose it is. Anyway, she’s absolutely
determined to leave him."

Angelica sat in silence, more utterly wretched than ever. Had Vincent
just sacrificed himself for her? Did he really love her? And for his
love was he to be utterly cast out?

"No!" she said suddenly, aloud.

"No what?" asked Eddie.

"Nothing. I was just thinking. There comes the rain!" she cried. "Gosh,
what a storm!"

They both got up, to push back their chairs against the wall of the
house, but even there it reached them--the spray from the rain falling
in straight, heavy lines, dashing against the earth with a fierce
drumming noise that filled the air and confused the senses. The smell of
the soil, the dead leaves, the grass, came to them with its own
invigorating freshness; and in spite of the chilly sprinkle in their
faces they lingered; fascinated by the noise, the wet odours, the great
black, uproarious void before them. They stood close together, their
shoulders touching, their backs against the wall.

"Angelica!" said Eddie’s voice in her ear, curiously flat and faint in
the surrounding din. "Angelica, _can’t_ you? Just think--if I could only
know--while I’m away--that you--that you were waiting for me!"

"Eddie," she replied, "I couldn’t. Not now, anyway. Perhaps--later. _I_
don’t know."

"You mean--you think some day--it’s not _impossible_? You _could_, then?
I mean--I’m not repulsive to you?"

"Deary boy!" she protested. "Of course you’re not."

"Do you think you could--kiss me?" he asked. "I’m going away to-morrow."

She turned, put a hand upon his shoulder, and kissed him on the cheek.

"There!" she said. "Now you see!"

He didn’t move; stood there like a statue.

"I guess we’d better go in," she said. "We’re getting wet; and I’ve got
to pack up my things."

To go home! She began for the first time to imagine her home-coming, to
think of her future. This was all over; she would never get another such
job, never again be in a house like this, never again have a chance like
this!

She began to think of the kitchen, of the factory, of their suppers of
tea and bread and margarine, of her mother, listless and hopeless--all
of it hopeless--even Vincent. What could he ever do for her, even if he
had the inclination? Who was there on earth who cared to do anything for
her, who could give her in any way the things she craved? Panic
overwhelmed her.

"Eddie!" she cried. "I--could!"

He was suddenly galvanized into life.

"Could?" he cried. "Could what?"

"If you want--I’ll marry you!"

His arms went around her, pressing her tightly against his coat. A smell
of damp tweed and cigar-smoke filled her nostrils; she couldn’t see or
move at all, her head was so buried in his clumsy embrace.

"Oh, my darling!" he cried. "Oh, Angelica, to think that I have to go
_now_!"

"But I’ll be waiting for you," she said.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN


She stood on the front steps long after he was out of sight, lost in a
painful reverie. The rain was still falling steadily and violently,
without wind, from a pale gray sky. She watched it, absently, churning
the gravel walk, splashing up again from the puddles. What a desolate
and tremendous world that morning!

Eddie was really gone. She had said good-by to that generous and loyal
friend, had pressed his hand and tried to smile brightly after him. He
hadn’t wanted her to go to the railway-station with him.

"No," he had said. "Let’s say good-by here, in the place that’s going to
be our home."

He was in a bad state. He did all he knew to conceal it, but it was none
the less apparent to her that he was deeply troubled by the thought of
what lay before him, that he was most reluctant to go, unhappy, alarmed,
and a little puzzled. He was ashamed of all this, he wished to be a man,
like Vincent, and he naïvely believed that a true man was practically
devoid of any emotion, except love and anger.

Nevertheless, disturbed as he was, he didn’t for a moment neglect his
beloved Angelica’s interests. He wished to know how she was to get on.

"I’ll find another job," she said.

He didn’t object; he really considered that it would be best for her to
remain sturdily independent, under no obligation to him.

"I’ve made a will," he said hurriedly, "so that if I don’t come back,
you’ll be all right. In the mean time, if you do need anything, here’s
my lawyer’s address. I’ve told him to give you anything you ask for
without question."

Mrs. Russell, too, had gone. She had felt so upset by Eddie’s departure
and Polly’s cruel behaviour that she was obliged to take a ten-day
motor-trip with the doctor and Courtland. She hadn’t remembered to bid
Angelica good-by.

Polly, however, had been very, very kind. She had given Angelica several
little presents, which wasn’t her way, and she had spoken to her with a
sincere kindliness.

"My dear girl," she had said, "this has been a wretched thing for you. I
only hope it won’t really harm you. You mustn’t let it. Try to forget
it. Just now, perhaps, there’s a sort of glamour--but after you’ve been
gone for a while, I think you’ll see it all more clearly"--meaning
Vincent all the time, of course. "If only you could find some work that
you could put your heart into, Angelica--something you are suited to!
What do you think you’d like?"

"Well, I guess I’m going to marry Eddie----”

"Yes," said Polly, who didn’t think that would ever come to pass. "But
he may be gone for a long time; and meanwhile you’d like to show him,
wouldn’t you, what you can do?"

"I guess I’d like dressmaking and millinery," said Angelica.

"Very likely I can find some sort of opening for you. I know quite a
number of self-supporting girls. Keep in touch with me, be sure!"

The house was very quiet. There was nothing to distract her, and
Angelica was able to meditate at her leisure. She thought first of
herself and her return to her mother, of that "going back" which was so
difficult to this ardent spirit always eager to go forward.

She suffered under a terrible discontent and restlessness. She was
ashamed of the past, disgusted with the future. She felt that life, real
life, was ended; the adventure finished, the mysterious charm lost.

Try as she would, she could not keep her mind from straying to Vincent.
He was adventure and charm, life itself, for her. She told herself that
she was going to forget him. He had treated her very badly, and she was
done with him. She was going to marry Eddie and be done with Vincent
_forever_.

But she knew that she could not. Wouldn’t she see forever in her dreams
that big, arrogant man with his hawk-like face and his bright hair? He
had hurt her, but he had made her happy, too. He had come upon her with
violence. Everything about his brief love-making had been startling and
disturbing. She had often hated him, but she had always loved
him--always, from that moment when she had seen him standing in the
doorway of Mrs. Russell’s room.

Then she gave her attention to Eddie, with a queer soreness of heart.
She felt that she was taking advantage of Eddie; that he was too good
for her. She was so sorry for him, so full of affection and respect for
him--and so disinclined to think about him!

She fancied she saw coming the taxi which was to take her to the
station, and she ran up-stairs to fetch her bag. Her familiar room was
neat and desolate, with the green blinds pulled half-way down, the
bureau and dressing-table stripped bare, the bed covered over with a
sheet. All trace of her was obliterated. It saddened her; she took a
last glance at herself in the darkened mirror and went out, closing the
door behind her.

She almost ran into Annie, who had been on the point of knocking on her
door.

"Mr. Vincent says he’d like to see you in the music-room for a few
minutes," the maid said curtly.

"No!" said Angelica, and then, almost immediately: "Yes!"

After all, she ought to see him, after what he had done. She ought to
thank him. Even if she were going to marry Eddie, there was no harm in
that. In fact, Eddie would doubtless have approved of it.

"He won’t eat me," she said. "Let’s see what he’s got to say!"

She tried to prepare herself for anything, whether she found him
pleading, passionate, brutal, or depressed. She felt herself quite
strong enough to withstand any of his moods--stronger than he was.

She entered again that little music-room where Mrs. Russell had
interviewed her so long ago; but to-day it had taken on quite a new
character. He had pulled the shades up to the top of the windows, so
that the cold light of the rainy day came in to destroy the charm and
romance of the armour, the harp, and the orange-shaded lamp that had so
delighted her.

Vincent sat on the piano-stool, writing on the closed piano. He was
without a coat, in a gray flannel shirt and old blue trousers. His hair
was all on end, in wildest disorder, and his face, when he turned to
Angelica, was troubled and ecstatic. He looked boyish, very touching,
and his manner was altogether unstudied.

"Angelica!" he said. "Please listen to this! Just tell me--these few
lines--do you get a picture at all? I mean--just tell me exactly how it
makes you feel--not what you think of it, you know, but how you _feel_.
Sit down, please, and keep quiet. Now, you know, this is almost the end
of the thing--the chap’s losing his faith--before he has the vision.
It’s free verse, of course--an impression:

    "Men crushed down, like worms under a heavy foot,
    Half stamped into the mud, but the other half
    Still squirming. Writhing corpses
    With writhing wounds,
    From which the blood squirts violently;
    And over it all, in a cloud of mist, rose and gold,
    Rides God.
    God! God! God, the father of all these mutilated animals!
    God Almighty, whose will it is to kill his sons in these hideous ways!
    He sees everything. He hears everything. He hears their yells,
    Their howls for pity and for death. He could stamp the worm
    Quite out of existence;
    Smear it into the ground so that it should be obliterated and
    At peace;
    But for His own good purposes, He lets it squirm!"

Angelica was quite stupefied; she had no clue, no dimmest idea what to
say. She didn’t even know whether this weird stuff was meant to be
funny. She thought it was and yet----

"You see," he went on, "it’s meant to be horrible. It is horrible, isn’t
it?"

"Sure!" said Angelica. "It is."

"Now wait!" he said peremptorily, and swung round again on the stool, to
continue his writing.

"Wait!" he muttered again. "Don’t go! I want you to hear this!"

She sat perfectly still for a long time. Then, suddenly, he groaned,
looked round at her with a sort of glare, and tore up his paper with an
oath.

"No!" he cried. "No! I can’t _get_ it! Lord, it’s such torment!"

He buried his head in his hands.

"Angelica!" he said in a muffled voice. "Please come here!"

"What is it, Vincent?" she asked gently.

"Angelica! What’s going to become of me?" he asked huskily, his face
still hidden.

The question startled her.

"Why, I don’t know," she said. "I suppose you----”

"But I’m all alone!" he said in a sort of bewilderment. "They’ve all
left me, and you’re going, too!"

She didn’t dare to touch him, but her voice was a caress.

"Vincent, I’m sorry!"

He looked up and seized her hand.

"Oh, my love!" he said. "Aren’t we _fools_? Even to think of such a
thing as parting! You and I, Angelica, to part! It couldn’t be!"

"It’s got to be, Vincent," she answered, trying to withdraw her hand.

"No, it’s not. No, Angelica, you shan’t leave me!"

"Vincent!" she said. "Don’t! You’ve made enough trouble. Don’t make any
more."

"It’s you who are making the trouble. You’re breaking my heart, and your
own too--yes, yours! You can’t deny it! Every drop of blood in your body
tells you the same thing. You need me and you long for me as I need and
long for you."

"Please!" she said, beginning to cry. "You know I’m going to marry
Eddie."

"There’s no one else in the world but you and me. All other people, all
other things, are shadows--lies--folly! You are a woman and I am a man,
and we love each other. We cannot part!"

"I must!" she said desperately. "You know I must!"

"No! No! Only love me, Angelica, and care for nothing else. Oh, you
could not be so base and cowardly as to leave me!"

"Oh, Vincent!" she sobbed. "You talk like a fool! You know I can’t stay
here!"

"Look here!" he said. "Eddie gave me a hundred dollars. Come away with
me--now--this instant! Anywhere--it doesn’t matter. Just as we are,
friendless, homeless, penniless--just you and I, to make our way
together in the world."

She shook her head, the tears rolling down her cheeks.

"Oh, why didn’t you let me alone?" she cried, forlornly.

"My girl, how could I? I couldn’t lose you," he said, surprised. "I
couldn’t let you go."

"But you must!"

"But I won’t!"

"If you do really love me, you won’t make me so miserable----”

"Angelica, I don’t love like that. I don’t care whether you’re unhappy
or not. I want you! I am mad for you! Even if it means your damnation
and ruin, on earth and in hell! I don’t care for anything but you--not
for God Himself!"

"Don’t talk like that!"

"It’s true. I know well what I’m doing. For you I’ve lost my immortal
soul. I haven’t a soul now. I love you as Satan loves. I want to drag
you down to hell with me!"

Angelica, however, was by no means so concerned with hell as she was
with this world.

"But think what would become of me!" she cried.

"Who cares?"

This viewpoint startled her.

"Well," she said, "_I_ care."

"No, you don’t," he answered. "You only care for me."

She wished to argue, to defend herself; but it was too late. She was
lost. His words so appealed to the recklessness in her own nature, to
her devil-may-care heart, that she could not counter them. She loved
this man; her whole heart urged her blindly to follow him, to do what he
asked, to hurry gloriously to destruction.

She made a half-hearted effort to get away from him, but he only held
her closer. He looked down at her and laughed.

"No use!" he said. "You don’t _want_ to go!"

Suddenly she flung her arms about his neck, and clung to him, looking up
into his bold eyes.

"All right!" she cried. "_I_ don’t care!"




PART TWO




CHAPTER ONE.


I

Mrs. Kennedy was very tired that afternoon. She had just finished
scrubbing a kitchen for a tenant, crawling laboriously across the greasy
soft-wood boards with her brush and her pail and her cloth. There had
been some foreign sort of fish stew cooking on the stove all the time,
and the smell had turned her sick. She had got splinters into her
water-softened hands, and her back ached with a ferocious, burning ache.
She came down the basement stairs carrying the empty pail, slowly--far
more slowly than she used to come.

"There’s not a thing in for my supper," she thought. "Well, I shan’t
bother to go out and get anything. I’ll just lay me down and rest. I’m
tired--tired _out_!"

The front door was unlatched. She pushed it open with her foot, and went
along to the kitchen. She wanted a cup of tea, but she couldn’t make the
effort to get it ready. She couldn’t even lie down. She sat on the
step-ladder chair, straightening her aching back and supporting it with
one hand while her eyes roved about her neat and dismal little domain,
hoping to discover what she very well knew wasn’t there--something to
eat, prepared and ready.

She was beginning to be dulled and blunted by solitude. Her life’s
incentive was gone; she had no reason for working and living other than
an animal reason--to feed herself. Her spirit had no food, and it was
perishing.

She had a vague distaste for death, which was just sufficiently stronger
than her apathy to preserve her existence. She slept in her underground
cave, cooked and ate what was essential, kept it and herself respectable
and clean, and went dully on working, working, going wherever she was
bidden, doing whatever she was told.

She had decided to go out to the corner, to buy two bananas for her
supper, when the door opened and Angelica came in.

She was just the same--jaunty, swaggering. It might have been one of
those long-past evenings when she came back from work, tired, but
restless and hungry. She had the same shabby suit and ungloved hands.

"Hello, mommer!" she said.

Amazing to see the change in that worn face!

"_Angie!_ For goodness’ sake! I never looked for _you_! Why ever didn’t
you write, deary, so’s I’d have something in for your supper?"

"It don’t matter, mommer. I’ll go out and get something."

"I’ll get my purse----”

"No--I got some money. Listen, mommer, I’m going to stay home with you a
while. Mr. Eddie’s gone to the war and Mrs. Geraldine’s gone away. Now,
for Gawd’s sake, don’t begin to ask a lot of questions! I’m dead tired.
I’ll go out and get something for us to eat, and we’ll go to the movies
after. You put on the water for tea now, while I run to the corner."

But even after the front door had slammed, it was some time before Mrs.
Kennedy got up to put on the kettle.

"What ever is she doing home now, all of a sudden, like this?" she asked
herself. "I don’t see. Oh, I do hope there’s nothing wrong! She’s so
hasty!"

Angelica came in again with a great paper bag.

"I got a regular treat," she said. "Sardines, rolls, cheese, and a nice
big can of cherries!"

"You mustn’t waste your money, deary," said her mother mechanically.

They both set to work to open the tins, brew the tea, and lay out the
supper.

"It does taste good," Mrs. Kennedy admitted. "Somehow, when I’m alone, I
haven’t got the heart to buy things and cook them. It’s nice to see you
again, Angie!"

"I dare say you’ll soon be sick of me," said Angelica. "Now, come along,
mommer, put on your hat and coat!"

They went out together, the tall, swaggering daughter, the small,
decorous mother, along the swarming streets to their favourite
moving-picture "palace." It was exactly the sort of picture Mrs. Kennedy
liked, a "society" one, and in addition her daughter bought her a box of
caramels. In every way a treat, a notable evening!

And yet, all the time, her vague anxiety persisted. She had questions
which she felt she must ask. They went home, and to bed, without her
having summoned courage to put them. Then, at last:

"Angie!" she said softly in the dark. "Angie!"

Not a sound. Angelica must have fallen asleep as soon as her head
touched the pillow.


II

Mrs. Kennedy was very much surprised to see Angelica spring out of bed
the next morning at six o’clock, for she had always liked to lie in bed
till the last possible instant. Her mother was still more surprised to
hear her say:

"I’ll get the breakfast, mommer!"

"You needn’t to, deary. I guess you want a little rest."

"Rest, nothing! I’m going out to hunt for a job this morning."

"But aren’t you ever going back there--to Mrs. Russell’s?"

"Not much! I’m going back to the factory again."

"Oh, Angie! I’m sorry!"

"Why? You made enough row about my going to Mrs. Russell’s."

"Only because I didn’t think you could get the place; but now that you
did, I’d hate to see you go back. I’d like to see you better yourself."

"Oh, for Gawd’s sake! That stuff again! No! Let me tell you, mommer, I’m
through with all that. I’m all right the way I am. I’m good enough--as
good as any of _them_, anyway."

She put on her hat and went out, without a kiss, without a good-by, and
Mrs. Kennedy saw no more of her till six o’clock, when she came in, pale
and scowling.

"What’s the matter with the supper?" she said, roughly. "Why ain’t it
ready?"

"I just got in myself," said Mrs. Kennedy. "I had a hard day."

"Well, you’re not the only one," said Angelica. "What you got?"

"I’ll have to run to the corner."

"Now, see here!" said her child. "I won’t stand this! I’m not going to
wait this way. If you can’t have my supper ready when I get home, I
won’t come home--d’ye understand?"

This was but the first indication of a change, a profound change, in
Angelica. Her mother saw it with anguish. She was rougher, coarser, more
cruel. She was brusque with her mother in a way quite different from her
old, careless fashion. She was cold, critical, scornful.

She had got back her job in the factory where she had worked before, but
she didn’t bring her money home now. Her mother was obliged to ask for
some when she had nothing left to buy what her child demanded; and then,
fiercely reluctant, Angelica would throw down on the table a crumpled
dollar bill.

Her habits were altogether changed. She spent no more evenings with her
mother at home or at the movies. She went about with other factory
girls, to dance-halls and cabarets of the cheapest sort. She bought
herself daring blouses, thin as a veil, through which her lean brown
shoulders shone; she wore short skirts, and had gauzy silk stockings on
her long legs; she painted her face with exaggeration.

"Angie!" her mother remonstrated. "You don’t look _decent_!"

"I don’t want to," she replied.

Night after night she stopped out until one o’clock. Then her mother
would be awakened by voices in the courtyard--a kiss, very likely, a
scuffle, a slap. That was Angelica and her escort, saying good night.

Then she would come in, jaded, irritable, the paint very brilliant on
her pale face, and begin undressing--not in the dark, as she had done
formerly, to avoid disturbing her mother. She would come into the room
with no effort to be quiet, light the gas, and dawdle about, while the
poor anxious woman in bed lay watching her, sometimes asking questions,
but timidly, dreading a rebuff.

"Bah! I’m so sick of it!" Angelica told her one night. "Those cheap
dances--those smart Johnnies mauling you round with their sweaty
hands--and then a glass of beer and a whole lot of their cheap talk.
_Cheap_, all of it! I’m sick of--everything!"

She had flung herself down fully dressed on her cot, her soiled white
shoes on the clean spread.

"Just _sick_!" she repeated, with a break in her voice.

Her mother was moved.

"Maybe it’s because you got used to better sort of people out where you
were," she said.

Angelica raised herself and looked at her.

"_Better!_ Well, maybe they were. I don’t know. Only--I don’t know--I
did get to like having things nice, and hearing nice voices. All this
is kind of a sudden change. And the bunch I go out with--Lord, what a
bunch!"

"Then why do you go out so much, deary? Why don’t you stay home?"

"Oh, for Gawd’s sake, mommer! After working all day, a girl my age can’t
sit home alone all evening."

Alone! The poor woman winced.

"You could read magazines, or get books out of the library."

"I don’t want to read. There’s nothing in books. I want to live. I want
to find out if there’s anything--anywhere."

"What do you mean, deary? If there’s anything anywhere?"

"Oh, it don’t matter! I’m going to bed. Good night!"

They went on in this way for weeks. What misery for the mother! She was
nothing to her child; she could not even serve her. Angelica had become
completely independent. She didn’t want to talk to Mrs. Kennedy, to go
out with her, to stay at home with her.

Moreover, she had grown indifferent to the little niceties about which
she had once been so fastidious. Sometimes she would get in earlier than
her mother. Then, without waiting, she would get some sort of meal for
herself, eaten off the tub tops, from the saucepan in which it was
cooked. She would spend a long time dressing herself in her vivid
finery, leaving the dirty pots for her mother to wash. Then again she
wouldn’t appear until late, long after Mrs. Kennedy had disposed of her
meal.

"We met some of the fellers," she would say; "and we hung around a while
and ate a lot of candy. I don’t want any dinner."

One evening her mother weakly reproached her for her lateness.

"There I had a nice bit of chopped meat fried and ready for you," she
said. "You ought to let me know when you’re not coming in. It’s a
trouble to me and a waste of money to buy things and you not to touch
them."

"Forget it!" said her child. "I’m never in any hurry to get home, I can
tell you. To this hole! Why should I?"

"To see me!" cried her mother in desperation.

"Been seeing you every day for nineteen years. No, mommer, you can’t
keep me hanging round you any more. I got to be free."

"That don’t mean you’re not to be kind and loving to----”

"Well, I’m _not_ kind and loving. Gawd didn’t make me that way."

Her mother grew more and more certain that Angelica had met with some
disaster in her past situation. She thought over it at night when she
lay in bed, in the day while she worked--thought of it with anguish and
terror. Her peasant soul forgot its acquired American sophistication,
and craved that age-old solace nowhere to be found in her present mode
of life--a priest, a pastor, some one in authority to reassure her.

She hadn’t even neighbours to gossip with, as people had in the "old
country." There was no one who had seen her child grow up, who knew all
about her, and could and would discuss her with kindly penetration. A
stranger in a strange land, but--how wretchedly!--a stranger to whom no
country was home. Certainly America was not her heart’s land; certainly
Scotland, the home of her parents, would have seemed wholly alien; while
her husband’s birthplace, to her, was little more than a fantastic
dream-land.

Unto the third generation does this strangeness persist. Angelica
herself had that peculiar lack of ease, that exotic quality; she was an
outsider. Her factory friends, too--they were of every race, and they
had all become alike. Bohemian, Irish, Russian, Italian--they had all
the same air; but it was a foreign air. Their adopted country had
undeniably changed them into something different, but it had not made
them American. It had made them only strangers.


III

One morning Angelica didn’t get up. Her mother, in great anxiety, came
over to her, to make enquiries, but Angelica drove her away with
fierceness, swearing at her, abusing her.

"Let me alone!" she cried. "Shut your mouth and mind your own business!"

"Oh, Angie, Angie!" said the poor soul. "If you’d only talk to me! If
you only had the sense to know how I could help you!"

"Shut up!" screamed Angelica, hysterically. "And get out! Don’t speak to
me again!"

Mrs. Kennedy took up her pail and went out; but half-way up the stairs
she collapsed. She sat down on one of the steps and tried to pray; but
she didn’t know quite what to ask of God.

Because she _knew_; she couldn’t doubt any longer. She knew what was
wrong with Angelica!

She didn’t really want to pray. She wanted God to do the talking. She
wanted to listen to Him, not to talk to Him; to discuss it, to ask
questions, to have an explanation, to hear the voice of authority.

What was the use of sitting there telling Him what He surely knew? Or to
beg for mercy or pity, when what she wanted was advice? Not that vague
sort of "guidance" which one prayed for, and which really meant puzzling
things out alone as best one could. There was one thing, though----

"Oh, Lord!" she prayed. "Soften Thou her heart and let her turn to me!"

She remembered afterward how miraculously this prayer was answered.

She was scrubbing the vestibule--a task of peculiar hopelessness,
because people always came in to walk over it all the time she was
trying to clean it. She heard a voice say "Mommer!" and, looking up, saw
her child, huddled in an old wrapper, standing before her. Angelica was
struggling with a deadly nausea. She was frightened and desperate, her
face a sickly white, her hair in dank disorder.

"Mommer!" she said again. "Come down-stairs! I feel awful sick!"

Her mother got up, leaving pail and brush where they were, and put an
arm around this beloved child, so much taller and stronger than she, and
yet, in her youth and her ignorance, so much weaker. She helped her
down-stairs and into bed again.

"Lie still!" she said. "That’s the best you can do, my deary. It’ll pass
away."

"Can’t you get me some sort of medicine, mommer?"

"Nothing that would help you, my deary," Mrs. Kennedy told her. "You’ve
just got to bear it, Angelica."

The girl looked up with somber eyes.

"Mommer," she said, "listen! What do you guess is the matter with me?"

"Angelica, my deary, I _know_!"

"Then, mommer, I’m going to kill myself!"

Her mother said nothing at all, but to herself she thought:

"Why not? It would be the best and the quickest for both of us. If you
don’t--oh, what’s ahead of us, and how ever can we go through with it?"

Angelica searched her mother’s face, but in vain; it was impassive.

"What else _can_ I do?" she cried.

"There’s always something that can be done," said her mother. "We’ll try
and think, deary."

"Mommer!"

"Yes, my deary?"

"Do you feel--different to me?"

"No, Angelica, nor ever shall!"

But she did. Strong in the simple soul was the old worship of the
virgin. Angelica had been before a mystic and holy thing. She was now no
more than a woman, like herself; and a woman is no fit object for
worship.

Mrs. Kennedy wasn’t shocked, in a moral sense. She didn’t dwell much
upon that side of the case. Her great concern was with practical
problems--above all, how they were to get the money which she knew would
be needed. She always spoke of girls in similar situations as
"unfortunate," and that is just the way she saw it.

She sat at the bedside, trying her best to make some sort of plan.




CHAPTER TWO


I

But Angelica herself! That _she_ should be undergoing this horror, this
nightmare, this incredible thing she had heard of and read of!

"Oh, mommer!" she cried. "Oh, _mommer_! It’s the worst thing I ever
heard of! I’m the worst----”

"Hush, deary! Don’t talk so wild. It’s bad, I must admit, but you’re
young, and I dare say you loved the man and trusted in him, to your
sorrow."

Angelica turned her face to the wall. That was the very worst of it. She
hadn’t really trusted Vincent at all. She had simply followed an
instinct of which she understood nothing. She had been dazzled by his
words, been deluded through compassion, through recklessness, through
desire, into throwing herself away upon a man who cared nothing for her,
who had no affection, no human kindness. He didn’t care what happened to
her. If she had been willing to stay with him a little longer, he would
have been willing to "love" her a little longer; but when she had
decided to leave him, he offered no resistance. He would quite easily
forget her, she knew.

Useless to tell herself that the conventional code of morality meant
nothing to her. It did! She had fancied herself superior to all that,
but that was because she hadn’t known or imagined what such a surrender
meant. Just to run into his arms, without ceremony, without any promise,
any covenant, without regard for any other human creature, reckless of
her own future, flinging away her pride, her freedom, her decency. That
wasn’t beautiful. That wasn’t love. What in God’s name was it?

She had not even happy memories. It was shame to remember her past joy.
She loathed herself for her past ecstasy. A perfect terror of her own
infamy swept over her.

"No!" she cried. "I can’t stand it! Mommer, it’s too awful! You don’t
know how awful! You don’t know what I did!"

"Why don’t you tell me, deary?"

"I can’t! I don’t know how. I’ll try." She sat up in bed and caught her
mother’s hand. "The worst is the way I treated Eddie. He was so good to
me! He asked me to marry him, and I said I would; and then, the very day
he left, I went away--with his own brother!"

"Oh, Angie!" cried her mother, in horror.

"Oh, mommer, if you knew Eddie, you’d see what an awful thing I’ve done!
He’s such a _good_ man, and so--kind of noble, and all that! I don’t
know how he’ll ever stand it. He trusted me."

"But what ever made you do such a thing, Angelica? Are you so terrible
fond of this other one?"

"No--not now. No--that’s what I can’t explain. I don’t know why I did.
I--I just seemed to forget everything. I--just thought--I loved him."

"And you don’t? You love the other one--the good one?"

Angelica began to weep.

"No," she said. "That’s the worst. I don’t love either of ’em. What’s
the matter with me, do you suppose? I don’t seem to have any heart!" She
struggled painfully to get her thought into words. "I hate Vincent, and
I like Eddie, a lot; but love--I’ve never felt it at all, mommer, for
any one," she sobbed. "Not that love they have in books. It makes me
feel dreadful. If I loved Vincent, I wouldn’t feel so mean and low and
bad. It would be--sort of splendid; but this! Mommer!"

"Well, deary?"

"Maybe there’s no such a thing."

"No such a thing as what?"

"As love."

Mrs. Kennedy had never experienced it; had never seen or heard of any
authentic case of this beautiful tenderness, this undying devotion, this
heavenly thing. Yet she firmly believed that it existed--this love which
was not desire, not infatuation, not madness, not sentimentality, not
friendship--this ecstasy which endured forever. Not experience, not
common sense, nothing at all could have convinced her, for it was
instinct that made her believe--nature’s most cruel and most necessary
deception. For life to continue, it is necessary that women shall cling
to two lies--that men are capable of truly loving them, and that their
children will love them in their old age.

"Deary," said Mrs. Kennedy, "I think you’d better write to him and tell
him, and see what he will do for you. Perhaps he’ll marry you."

"He is married," said Angelica indifferently. "Yes, mommer, I will write
to him; but it’s an even chance if he’ll come or not. He’s queer. You
can’t ever tell, with him. I’ll try, anyway, and see if I can’t get some
money out of him."

To her mother the tragedy was somewhat lessened by the fact that
Angelica didn’t love Vincent. She fancied that the girl would
consequently get over it better, not suffer so cruelly; but for Angelica
there lay the worst of it, the most intolerable part to bear. It was
that that made her frantic with shame and remorse. She looked in vain;
she could find no trace of magnificence in her downfall. It wasn’t a
splendid sin, done for reckless love. It was a damnable folly, committed
through reckless ignorance.


II

She wrote to Vincent with a sort of naïve art. She wished to hide the
least sign of anxiety or reproach; she wished him merely to think that
she missed him.

     Why don’t you come? I have been looking for you for ever so long.
     Come in some evening soon.

                                                              ANGELICA.

The evening after the letter was mailed, she got up and dressed herself,
trembling with weakness, hardly able to stand, but quite self-possessed.
She didn’t feel the slightest emotion at the prospect of seeing Vincent
again--nothing but a dogged resolution to make him give her money.

She attempted no attitude, made no plan of what she would say to him,
because she knew now how helpless she was in his hands. _He_ would
direct the interview; _he_ would give the key-note; it would all depend
upon his mood. She couldn’t influence him. She didn’t even take pains
with her appearance, for she knew that it didn’t lie with her to move
him. It depended upon the condition of his own mysterious soul.

She had hardly expected him so soon. He came that same evening, but,
from the very sound of his footsteps as he followed her along the hall
to the tiny parlour, she could feel that he was sullen and reluctant,
and her heart sank.

"Oh, if only I didn’t have to bother with him!" she thought. "If only I
didn’t have to see him ever again! And I’ve got to be nice to him and
ask him for money!"

They entered the parlour, and sat down in silence.

"Angelica!" he said abruptly, with a frown. "Why did you leave me?"

"I wanted to----”

"I was amazed. I was _shocked_. You behaved----” He hesitated for a
moment, then went on severely: "You behaved like a light woman. I
thought you were faithful and constant and sincere; and then, after _one
week_----”

"But what kind of a week was it?" cried Angelica.

"I’m not a rich man, but I did the best I could for you."

"You know what I mean! In that awful little road-house, with you
shutting yourself up in the bedroom all the time and leaving me there
alone for all those men to laugh at!"

"I had to write."

"You hadn’t any business to write. You might have thought a little bit
how I’d feel. If you couldn’t pay any attention to me, you
shouldn’t----”

"Did you bring me here to reproach me?" he demanded. "Because if you
did, I’ve had enough."

"No, I didn’t mean to scold you," she answered, hurriedly, recalled to
the necessity for placating him. "No--I just wanted to see you."

Her face, which had become so pinched, so colourless, was covered with a
vivid flush. The conciliatory words almost stuck in her throat; but
apparently Vincent didn’t observe her emotion.

"I’m not disposed to endure much more from you--upon my word, I’m not!"
he went on. "The way you went off, simply leaving me a note to say that
you thought you’d go home--making a fool of me! I was naïve enough to
imagine we were to spend our lives together. I thought we’d stay for a
month or so in that beautiful little mountain inn, fishing, tramping,
reading, talking----”

"You hardly spoke to me all day long. I had to sit down-stairs in the
dining-room with those fishermen."

"How was I to know that you had no resources? Besides, it was rainy, and
we couldn’t have gone out, anyway; but the very day you left the weather
cleared. I was really disgusted with you, Angelica. You behaved
abominably!"

"Well, Vincent," she said, "you’ll have to excuse that, and be a good
friend to me, because I need some money."

He jumped to his feet.

"You’re shameless!" he said. "I’m shocked!"

"No--listen! There’s going to be a baby!" she cried, in desperation.

He was a little taken aback for a moment. He gave a hasty glance at her
poor desperate young face, and then looked away.

"There!" he said, taking a leather wallet out of his pocket and
throwing it on the table. "Take it! It’s all I’ve got. My God, you can’t
get the better of a woman! They have it all their own way in this world.
They make us pay, and pay dear, for their follies!"

Angelica stared at him, astounded.

"_I’m_ supposed to be the guilty one," he went on. "_I’m_ the one who’s
held responsible--why, the good Lord only knows. _I’m_ the one to pay!"

"As for _me_," said Angelica, "it’s just a picnic, isn’t it?"

"You’re fulfilling your natural destiny--at my expense."

"Oh!" she cried. "I wish to God I could throw the money back in your
face, Vincent!"

"But you won’t. And now that you’ve got all that you can out of me, I
suppose I can go?"

But Angelica was weak; she couldn’t endure it.

"Do you mean that you’re not even sorry?" she cried. "Can’t you think
what this means to me--what’s going to become of me? Oh, Vincent, just
_think_ what’s before me!"

"Just what always was before you. You’re bad, my girl, through and
through. You couldn’t have ended any other way. No decency, no
self-restraint. I don’t suppose I was the first man----”

"Oh, don’t!" she cried. "Don’t! You can’t realize--oh, Vincent!"

"And as for _this_, it isn’t the first time such a thing has happened in
the world. Even a young girl brought up in sheltered luxury, like you,
must have heard of such things. In fact, my dear, you must have known
quite as well as I what the consequences of our adventure might be. If
you say you didn’t, you’re lying."

She put out one hand in a sort of mute and feeble protest.

"But I didn’t think--you’d change----” Her voice faltered; she found it
almost impossible to go on. "I thought--that you--felt like I did."

"So I did," he answered. "So I do--just the same as you. Our impulses,
our reasons for going off together, were exactly the same, only I’m
honest about it and you’re not. You pretend to be heart-broken because I
don’t care for you any longer, when, as a matter of fact, you don’t care
a bit more for me. You’re an utter hypocrite!"

She was confused and crushed by his words. He was taking away from her
her very last support--her conviction that she had been misled, wronged,
sinned against. Somehow he was putting her in the wrong. She couldn’t
deny that she had gone away with him of her own free will; and yet she
knew that it _hadn’t_ been her own free will. She didn’t deny her own
guilt, but she knew that his was far greater.

"I’m not a hypocrite," she said.

"Then you’re a fool. No--we’ve done with each other, Angelica. It’s over
for both of us."

"But it isn’t over for me!" she cried. Her heart was flaming with
resentment against the hellish injustice of it--that she should have all
the suffering, all the punishment. "Just _think_ of it!" she cried.
"Can’t you realize, Vincent, how dreadful it is for me?"

"No, I can’t realize. I’m not a woman, and I don’t pretend to understand
them and their fine feelings. I can’t understand or sympathize with this
cowardly whining over physical effects which are known to every one. Did
you want anything else from me, except money, Angelica?"

"Yes, I do!" she answered. "I do want something else, and I’ll get it,
too. I want to make you suffer, and I will, too!"

"Oh, I see--the wronged woman with the baby in her arms! Well, Angelica,
go ahead! Do your worst. I don’t think you can hurt me very much."

He looked down at her with a gay, mocking smile, he put on his hat, and
was gone.

Angelica went back to her mother with the wallet.

"Well!" she began. "Here’s----” But she broke down and began to cry
wildly.

"Oh, mommer! Mommer! I can’t bear this! I _can’t_ be treated like this!
Oh, mommer, not _me_! Not _me_! It can’t be true!"

Her mother was glad when she wept. She stroked Angelica’s head in
silence, pleased to see her softened, even humbled, happy to see that
ferocious hardness gone; not suspecting that that ferocity and that
hardness were the very best of Angelica, the very spirit of her. When
she wept like this, she was submerged, perishing, _going under_. With a
frightful effort she saved herself and rose above these bitter waters.

"He’ll _pay_, all right!" she said, looking up with an odd, horrible
grin. "You watch!"

"Don’t talk so, my deary!"

"Here--take it! Let’s see how much we’ve got to go on with," she
interrupted, pushing the wallet across the table. "He’s always saying he
hasn’t got a cent, but I notice he always finds plenty for anything he
wants. God knows where he gets it, but he does."

Her mother counted what was in the purse, and turned to Angelica with a
look of amazement.

"Why, Angie! There’s only four dollars here!"

Angelica laughed.

"It’s all we’ll get, anyway, mommer," she said. "It’ll have to do."




CHAPTER THREE


I

Behold Mrs. Kennedy answering an advertisement for a janitress, far over
on the lower West Side, in the Chelsea district.

"I have the best of references," she told Mr. Steinberg, the landlord.
"I’ve been where I am now for twelve years, and no complaints."

"Den vy do you leaf?"

"I don’t like living ’way up there," she answered calmly. "I’ve got more
friends down around here. And my married daughter’s coming to live with
me, and she’d rather be down here. She’s real lonely, now her husband’s
gone to the war."

This was her ruse to preserve that respectability which no one valued or
even observed.

She got the place, because of her decency and her references. There was
nothing to be said against her in any quarter. What is more, Mr.
Steinberg felt from the look of her that she was a hard worker. Like her
other place, it was a "cold water" flat; there was a man to look after
the furnace, but everything else was to be done by her, for her rent and
an incredibly small stipend. She agreed. Her sole asset was her
readiness to undertake hard and unremitting labour. There was not a
thing which she could do better than the average woman, so that her
boast, her credit, must be that she did _more_.

"My married daughter’s thinking of taking in sewing," she said. "Maybe
you could put a little work in her way."

"Ve’ll see," said Mr. Steinberg, "later on, maybe."

Now that she had secured a refuge, where Angelica might assume
respectability among complete strangers, the poor woman’s next
preoccupation was to find some way of having her pitiful furniture
moved. She went about for days, trying to drive bargains with any one
who possessed a cart; but war-time prices and conditions prevailed, and
no one cared to accept so unprofitable a task.

In the end she found an Italian who sold ice, coal, and wood in a
near-by cellar, and who agreed to do what she wished. She paid him at
least six visits, trying to persuade him to take less money, or to
promise great care with her scanty belongings, or to reassure herself
that he really understood the new address. In order to pay him and to
settle her few little bills, she was obliged to sell her parlour
furniture, blue lamp and all.

Winter was beginning to set in when they moved. It was a raw and bitter
day, blankly gray overhead. Mrs. Kennedy lingered in the old flat where
she had lived for twelve years, watching the Italian carry out her
things, her heart sick with shame to be leaving the place in this
fashion, her parlour furniture sold, her daughter "in trouble." There
was nothing left now but the barest essentials--things to sleep on, to
be covered with, to cook with, and a chair or two.

Angelica had gone by surface-car to the new home, to await the arrival
of the cart. For the moment each of them was alone in a dismal bare
flat, hopelessly similar. It was a day of gloom. The removal had brought
home to them most forcibly their desperate position, their helplessness,
their desolation. They had only each other--no other friend, no other
resource.

They set to work at once, in the dusk, to arrange their furniture; and
when a barren sort of order had been achieved, Mrs. Kennedy went out in
search of the usual little shop where she might buy a bite for
Angelica’s supper. She tried her best to be calm, resolute, strong; but
her heart was like lead as she hurried through the unfamiliar streets,
chilled by a cold wind from the river, and by a far colder and bleaker
apprehension.

She caught sight of a brightly lighted little grocery-store, and she
went in. Another pang! Here she was no one; simply a poorly dressed
stranger with a paltry handful of change. She remembered her own
cheerful young grocer with positive anguish. It was almost the last
straw.

She came back, half running, with her little bag under her arm, entered
the strange doorway, rang the strange bell. Her daughter admitted her.

"I didn’t do much," Angelica said. "I started to scrub the shelves, but
I felt tired. Anyway, what does it matter?"

She had been sitting in a dreadful apathy in the forlorn kitchen; she
sank down again on the old step-ladder chair.

"If only I had a bit of linoleum for the floor!" began Mrs. Kennedy,
looking down at the filthy boards. "A nice check pattern, like Mrs.
Stone had----”

Angelica stopped her.

"I prayed," she said.

"Oh, my deary! I’m so glad. God’ll hear you and----”

"I prayed it would die."

"_Angie!_"

"You didn’t think I wanted it, did you?"

"You’ll feel different when it’s here."

"I sha’n’t. Lots of people don’t. It’s a curse to me, a _curse_! A
baby--me with a living to earn the rest of my life! No--I’ll hate it. I
do now. I’d have to hate any child with _his_ blood in it. I hope it’ll
die!"

"That’s a wicked, wicked thing to say, Angie."

"Maybe you’d be surprised to know how wicked I feel. My Gawd, what I’ve
done! The chance I’ve thrown away!"

"That’s not like you, my deary."

"_I’m_ not like me--not like the me I thought I was. I thought I
was--oh, I don’t know--kind of a wonder; and after all, I’m nothing
but--this. Going to have a baby--pretending to be married--not a cent!
It’s a grand end, all right!"

"End, Angie?"

"Yes, end. I’m done--finished!"


II

Not her suffering, though. That had just begun. All that winter and
through the spring she lived in a misery without relief or solace. She
could think of nothing in all the universe but her own torment. She was
ashamed to go out, in spite of her mother’s account of her as a married
daughter with a husband gone to war, in spite of the wedding-ring the
poor embarrassed woman had bought for her at the ten-cent store. She
felt that she had in no way the appearance of a young wife. She felt
herself to be obviously and flagrantly an outcast.

She was ill, too, and so hopeless, so profoundly dejected, that she saw
no sense in getting up. She lay on her cot in the bedroom, dark as the
former one, day after day. Now and then a bit of sewing was brought to
her to do, and then she would drag herself into the kitchen and sit by
the window, where there was a little more light, until the work was
done. Otherwise she simply lay there, her black hair uncombed, an old
shawl about her shoulders, in fathomless despair.

Life was too ghastly to contemplate. She could see nothing before her
worth living for. Vincent was gone, and with him love and youth; Eddie
was gone, and with him security and hope. Whether the baby lived or
died, she was disgraced. She could never, never forget that she had been
cast aside.

They were bitterly poor, and seldom had enough to eat. There was nothing
to relieve their monotonous pain and anxiety; not a neighbour to
exchange a word with, not a bit of gossip to amuse them--nothing,
nothing, nothing, from morning till night but their own sad faces, their
own listless voices, their own leaden hearts, their own undying
apprehension.

"It’ll all seem different, deary, when you’re well again," Mrs. Kennedy
told her child. "Then you’ll go to work again, and we won’t be so
pinched. You’ll go back to the factory and see your friends, and go out,
like you used to, to the movies, and dances."

"I won’t. There’ll be a child to look after and feed. Just to work in a
factory till I’m too old, and then--I don’t know--die in the poorhouse,
I guess!"

"There’s lots of things might happen, Angie. Maybe you’ll marry. There’s
men that would be willing to over-look----”

"Well, I don’t want ’em. I’m through with men."

"Then maybe you’ll get on fine in some kind of business."

"No chance of that! I haven’t any education. I’m too ignorant. Don’t try
to make up things to comfort me; I know how it’ll be."

But still she didn’t, she couldn’t, want to die. No matter how terrible
her future looked, her strong spirit clung to life, even the most
repulsive life. It wasn’t that she feared death, but she resented it. It
was the complete defeat, the final outrage.

As her time drew near, she began greatly to dread dying. She would lie
by the hour, thinking of death, in a sort of silent fury.


III

At last it came upon her, one July morning, that most shocking and
insensate of nature’s cruelties. Her mother sat by her in fatalistic
patience, knowing well that there was no escape, no alleviation. There
was a doctor whom Mrs. Kennedy had summoned--not the noble and kindly
physician of Angelica’s romance, but an indifferent and callous one
accustomed to the poor and their profitless agonies. He was very
cheerful. He was able to look down upon that young face distorted in
brutal anguish, and smile.

"Nothing to be done now," he said. "I’ll look in again in an hour or
so."

He returned too late. The protesting little spirit had entered the world
without him, and lay crying, wrapped in an old flannel night-dress, in
Mrs. Kennedy’s lap, while the young mother watched it with unfathomable
eyes.




CHAPTER FOUR


I

Angelica sat at the kitchen table, her blouse torn rudely open at the
neck, wet through with perspiration, haggard and worn almost beyond
recognition.

"My Gawd!" she said, pushing back her hair. "It’s hot as hell, mommer!"

Mrs. Kennedy sighed, without speaking or interrupting her work. She was
standing at the ironing-board, finishing a big week’s washing. It was a
night of intolerable and sultry heat, and the kitchen, with the stove
lighted for the irons, and the gas blazing for light, was a place of
torment. The two women were curiously pallid, curiously alert, with the
terrible activity of exhaustion. They had reached so high a point of
suffering, both physical and mental, on that night, that they were no
longer aware of their pain.

"Listen, mommer!" said Angelica. "Here’s what I’ve written."

She picked up the sheet of soft paper with blue lines, on which the ink
blurred and the pen dug and scratched, and on which she had written:

VINCENT:

     The baby has been sick all the time, and now he is worse. You got
     to send some money for him. You got to find it somewhere if you
     have not got it. He is in a terrible bad state. He only weighs six
     pounds, and he is going on for six weeks.

                                                              ANGELICA.

She read it in her hoarse, thrilling voice, and it sounded so vehement,
so passionate, so touching, that they both believed the letter to be so
in itself.

"Now I’ll run out and mail it," she said.

Just as she was, with disheveled hair and unfastened blouse, she hurried
out into the street. A man spoke to her, and she swore at him.

She was back within a few minutes, panting, but her mother was no longer
in the kitchen; she had gone into the dark bedroom to quiet the poor
little baby.

"I’ll hold him, Angie," she said. "You can go on ironing."

But Angelica flung herself on her knees before the child on her mother’s
lap.

"Gawd! Little feller! Little love! Gawd, I wish he’d die and be out of
this!"

Her mother could not rebuke her. Worn out by unending worry, by lack of
sleep, by the heat, by intolerable toil for the tiny thing, she, too,
could only wish it dead. It suffered so; it was so weak, so pitiful.

Night after night they had held it in their arms, close to the window,
where it might get what air there was. They sang to it, rocked it,
bathed its wasted little body to cool it, and all the while it wailed in
its feeble voice--a weak, monotonous, heart-rending sound. They tended
it by day and by night. From time to time it slept, but fitfully, the
beating of its little heart shaking its emaciated body.

Angelica would sit beside it, her eyes fixed upon it, scarcely daring to
breathe in her terror that it might die as it slept; for though she said
and she meant that she wished it to die and be free of its misery, for
her own sake she longed for it to live to the utmost limit, no matter if
every day and every night were a pain to her, and her whole life went by
in its service. She wanted to be holding it in her arms every waking
hour; she could not sleep unless it lay within the reach of her hand.
Even if she went to the corner on an errand for her mother, she was
filled with panic until she had got back to it, and had seen it and
touched it again.

She cared for nothing else whatever. She didn’t trouble to dress
herself decently; she no longer helped her mother about the flat.
Barefooted, her heavy hair pinned in a great slovenly coil, her blouse
unfastened, with a ragged skirt hanging about her lean hips, she would
sit for hours with the little wailing thing in her arms, pressed against
her bosom, while she sang to it in her hoarse, touching voice.

She learned all she could from the doctor and the visiting nurse, and
did just as they had told her. She bathed the child, fed it, tended it,
in the most careful and professional way; but she would not let it
alone. The doctor told her to leave it in the clothes-basket which was
its bed, and the nurse assured her it would be cooler and more
comfortable there; but she could not restrain herself from snatching it
up. She could not help feeling that the passion of her love, the
generous warmth of her body, must invigorate and vitalize it. Most cruel
of all delusions--that love can save!


II

"He’s got to get into the country," said Angelica. "That’s all there is
to it. I’d send him to one of these fresh-air places, only I know he’d
die without me. He’s got to have me. No one else would know his ways."

"Well, if Mr. Geraldine sends----”

"If! If! If he don’t, I’ll---- He’s got to, that’s all. I’ll give him
just one day more, and then----”

"Maybe he’s not there. Maybe he’s gone to the war."

"Not a chance! Well, if he’s not there, I’ll have to find him, and I
will."

There was no letter the next day.

"You got to telephone," said Angelica to her mother, "and find out if he
still lives there at Buena Vista. If he does, I’ll write once more."

Her mother came in late that afternoon.

"He’s there," she said. "Somebody--one of the servants, I dare say--came
to the telephone, and I just said, ‘Is Mr. Vincent Geraldine there?’ And
she said, ‘Who is it wants to speak to him?’ And I said, ‘I only wanted
to know was he at home.’ ‘Oh, yes!’ she says. ‘He’s at home!’"

Poor woman, lugging her eternal bucket! She looked as if she were being
pressed down by giant hands which were forcing her exhausted and gallant
body to its knees. There was nothing ready for her now, at the end of
her bitter day--nothing in the house which she could cook for supper.
Her bed was still unmade, there wasn’t even a decent place for her to
sit down, for Angelica occupied the only rocking-chair, drawn up close
to the window, where the baby could get what air there was.

Mrs. Kennedy looked at them, and for an instant she hated them
both--Angelica who so savagely demanded this unceasing, inhuman toil of
her, who took everything and gave nothing, not so much as a loving word,
and this wailing, wretched little creature who didn’t even know her.

"It’s _too much_!" she thought. "I’m getting old."

"Take the baby," said Angelica, "while I write another letter."

"I’ll get some supper first."

"No! I’ve got to write now."

"Then put the kettle on, so’s we can have a cup of tea before long,"
said her mother, and sat down with the wretched, hot little baby in her
arms.

VINCENT:

     This child is going to die. You got to help it. If you do not send
     me some money for him right away, I will go out after you and get
     it. I don’t care if you are hard up. You can get it somewhere, and
     you got to. This child will die if you don’t.

                                                              ANGELICA.

"Deary," said her mother, "I don’t think it’s any good."

"It is!" Angelica assured her. "He’s got to pay!"


III

An answer came quickly enough. Angelica smiled grimly as she saw the
envelope. She and her mother were sitting together over their supper of
tinned pork and beans, Mrs. Kennedy eating with one hand while she held
the fitfully sleeping baby.

"Now we’ll see," said Angelica. "It’s always a guess with that feller.
You never know what he’ll say."

Vincent wrote thus:

ANGELICA:

     I would if I could. I am not altogether a brute, a monster. I am
     not callous to the sufferings of my own child; but I have
     absolutely nothing. Ever since I had your first letter I have been
     thinking, trying my utmost to discover some way to help you.

     And the only way I can do so is to appeal to Eddie, to tell him the
     whole story, and to throw ourselves on his mercy. It will be a
     bitter blow to him, and it is a terrible penance for me to tell
     him; but, for your sake, I must bear the pain of telling and he of
     hearing. He will help us, Angelica. He is a generous and noble
     soul. He has never yet failed me.

She remained stupefied.

"D’ye mean Eddie doesn’t know?" she cried, addressing an invisible
Vincent.

It was such an amazing idea to her. She had always imagined Eddie as
possessed of all the details. She had often thought of him, sitting in
his trench in the moonlight, reflecting with grief and bitterness over
her infamy. She had looked upon him as utterly lost, beyond her reach.
She had believed, as a matter of course, that all those people knew, and
despised and hated her--Polly, Mrs. Russell, all the servants.

"Why, mommer!" she cried. "He----”

"Whatever is it, child?" asked Mrs. Kennedy, surprised at the strange
look on her daughter’s face. Angelica had risen slowly to her feet, and
was staring at her mother. A new, a terrible hope was dawning upon her.

"Quick, mommer!" she cried suddenly. "I got to stop him!"

She rushed into the bedroom, put on a hat over her disordered hair,
pinned together the open bosom of her blouse, and ran down the hall.

"Angie! Angie!" cried her mother. "Where are you going?"

The door banged. She was gone.

Mrs. Kennedy laid the baby on the bed.

"Cry, if you must," she said. "I can’t hold you any more till I’ve had a
cup of tea."


IV

Angelica had gone running up the street to a drug-store on Sixth Avenue,
where she knew there was a telephone booth. It was a place of doubtful
repute. There was always a group there of young Italian-Americans,
flashily dressed youths of immense assurance, who were interested in
every woman that entered the store; but they didn’t care for Angelica in
her slatternly dress, with her fierce and haggard face.

One of them made a coarse jest about her, which she answered with an
oath; then she went into the booth and pulled the door to behind her.
Her heart was beating frantically; she was scarcely able to speak, her
hoarse voice came out with an unfamiliar sound.

"I want to speak to Mr. Vincent!" she said.

"Who is it?"

"Call him quick! It’s a message from his brother." A silly ruse, but she
was capable of nothing better. Then, after a long pause, she heard his
voice.

"What is it?"

"It’s me--Angelica. Vincent, don’t you _dare_ to write to Eddie! Don’t
you dare ever to let him know!"

"My dear child, I’ve already done so. I’ve just put the letter in the
box, not ten minutes ago."

"No!" she cried. "No! You must get it back!"

He laughed.

"When once a letter is posted----”

She gave a sort of wail. He was still speaking, but she didn’t care what
he said. She hung up the receiver and went out into the street again.
Somehow this seemed to her the very worst blow that had fallen on her,
the greatest cruelty of her destiny. To have got, in the blackness of
her despair, this glorious hope, and to have it destroyed almost before
it had breathed!

It occurred to her that there was one more desperate chance. She went
hurrying home again.

"Mommer!" she said. "Where’s your money?"

"I haven’t any money, Angie, as well you know."

"You have!"

"Only just the bit that’s to last us through the week."

"Give it to me, quick!"

She snatched up the flat little purse and rushed out again, pushing her
hair up under her hat as she ran. She didn’t quite know where to look.
She sought in vain along Sixth Avenue, then crossed to Fifth, and found
there what she wanted--an empty taxicab, cruising along Madison Square.

"Say!" she called. "Taxi!"

The man stopped and looked at her suspiciously. A queer-looking thing
she was to hail a cab!

"I want to go out to Baycliff," she said.

"You better walk, then," he said. "It’s cheaper."

"Oh, you’ll get paid, all right!" said Angelica. "The people out
there’ll pay you good and give you a tip."

He shook his head.

"I guess not," he said doubtfully. "You better find some one else. I’m
married. I can’t afford to take no chances. Where’d I be, if I wasn’t to
get paid? A long run like that, and got to come back empty!"

Angelica recalled something which had been mentioned in one of Mrs.
Russell’s long stories.

"Look here!" she said. "It’s the law. You got to take passengers."

"Not outside the city limits I haven’t," said the man.

They were both a little uneasy, as neither of them felt at all sure as
to what laws there might or might not be; but Angelica in her
desperation was resourceful.

"You let me in," she said, "and I’ll fix it up with the people out
there. See, I’ll give you two dollars now, but I won’t tell them I gave
you anything, and they’ll pay you and give you a tip, too. I’m the
waitress out there, and they’ll be darned glad to see me back. You
didn’t ought to worry. You’d ought to know I wouldn’t risk getting
locked up just for the sake of a ride. No one would take a chance like
that."

"Well, they do, all the same," said the driver. "It wouldn’t do me no
good to get you locked up--not if you didn’t have no money."

"It’s only people out on a joy ride that do that," said she. "Where’d be
the sense in me doing that--taking a ride all alone and then getting
locked up?"

He wavered, and she hurriedly got out the two dollars--earned by long
hours of scrubbing by Mrs. Kennedy--and gave them to the chauffeur. He
was now practically won; her insistence overcame his weak will, her two
dollars charmed him. Moreover, he liked her, she was so frank and so
much in earnest.

"All right," he said. "Get in! Now mind you treat me fair--I’m taking a
big risk for you!"

She was a strange enough figure, sitting there in her dusty clothes, her
battered old hat, while the cab sped on, through and out of the city,
along dark country roads lined with trees, past fields, past marshes,
past desolate buildings, past friendly lighted houses. She was consumed
with a fever of haste, burning with anxiety, looking over the driver’s
shoulders at the road before her, which seemed so endless.

Now they were going up the hill to the house--the very house.

"You wait a while," she said. "The longer you wait the more you’ll get
paid."

The front door stood open, with only a screen door across the aperture,
and a faint light from the hall shone out on the roadway. There didn’t
seem to be any one about. She stood outside, peering through the screen
into the hall, listening. Not a sound!

She was obliged to ring the bell; and who should open the door but the
doctor? He didn’t see who it was until he had let her in; then he was
frightened at the unexpectedness of her coming, at the wild disorder of
her appearance.

"What do you want?" he asked.

"I want to speak to Vincent," she answered. "Where is he?"

"He may be busy. I’d better----”

"_Where is he?_" she demanded.

When the doctor didn’t answer, she pushed by him and ran up-stairs.

Vincent was lying back in an armchair, in a bath-robe, his slender bare
feet on a second chair. He was eating biscuits and cheese from a plate
balanced on his knees, and reading a magazine, in the greatest possible
comfort, physical and mental, when without an instant’s warning Angelica
entered, wild, savage, relentless as a Fury.

He sat up, drawing the bath-robe tightly about him, and tried to frown
at her; but he felt, and he appeared, at a horrible disadvantage.

"What do you want?" he demanded.

She couldn’t speak for a moment. She only looked at him with her fierce
black eyes, pressing a hand against her breast, as if to stifle by force
the tumult there. He was alarmed, really, although he tried so
desperately to look scornful.

"Well?" he asked again. "What did you come here for?"

"That letter!" she said. "That letter to Eddie! You shan’t send it!"

"I have," he answered.

"No!" she cried. "No! You haven’t."

"I tell you I have!" he answered definitely. "I told you so over the
telephone."

She stood motionless, staring past him, oblivious of his uneasy
bewilderment. Thoughts were running through her brain like fire through
parched grass. She remembered things she had heard--of the English
suffragettes pouring acid into mail-boxes to destroy their contents. But
what did they use, and where to get it?

Her vigorous and subtle brain was never quite without resource. She
thought and thought, with passionate intensity, and at last, suddenly,
an idea came to her. She went out of the room abruptly, so swiftly and
silently that Vincent was astonished and more than ever alarmed. What in
Heaven’s name was that damnable girl up to now? He knew she wouldn’t
stop at anything.

He went on tiptoe to the door and peered cautiously out into the hall.
She wasn’t there. Where was she? He was certain that she hadn’t given up
and gone away. She was after that letter, and she wouldn’t go without
it.

"She’s ill, though," he muttered. "Beastly--savage! Forcing her way in
like this! My God, I’ll _never_ be rid of her! What the devil was the
matter with me, to get mixed up with a girl like that? I wish she’d
break her neck. I wish I had the courage to wring it!"

He stopped suddenly and turned pale; for there on the mantelpiece,
before his eyes, was the letter. Courtland had forgotten to mail it!

He flew at it and tore it into bits, like a criminal concealing some
trace of his guilt. He was actually capable of imagining that, by this,
he had got the better of Angelica.


V

Angelica ran down-stairs to the kitchen, which was deserted, but quite
brightly lighted. There, on the back of the coal range, stood what she
had expected to see--the teakettle, gently steaming.

She lifted it, and went to the back door. There was a couple--probably
Annie and her young man--sitting in the dark on the steps. She turned
back, went through the laundry and out of a side door; down the hill,
through the grass, where she wouldn’t make a sound. Once she stumbled,
and a few drops of scalding water spilled upon her instep. She smothered
a shriek of pain, and hurried on.

There wasn’t a soul in sight; the road was quite empty even of passing
motors. She crossed to the other side, where the post-box stood, and,
raising herself on tiptoe, she poured into it the entire contents of the
kettle.

Then she ran into the woods behind the box, and hid the kettle in a
clump of thick bushes. She was satisfied that the letter must be
destroyed, together with anything else the box may have contained. Her
conscience did not reproach her in the least for this possible injury to
others.

"There couldn’t be any one," she reflected, "who could want any one else
to get a letter as much as I _don’t_ want Eddie to get that one!"


VI

She rang the front door-bell again, but this time the doctor didn’t let
her in. He looked at her through the screen door and shook his head.

"No!" he said softly. "Better go away. Don’t make any disturbance, for
your own sake."

"I only want to speak to Vincent," she said, plaintively.

"Better not. Go away now. Nobody’s seen you. Vincent and I are alone in
the house. I’ll never mention it. I’m your friend, you know; and you
must be my friend if I need one, won’t you?"

He had heard rumours, which he didn’t quite believe, that Eddie was to
marry this remarkable young woman. He knew that Eddie was capable of
extraordinarily quixotic deeds, and he thought it just as well to have a
friend at court, in case---- Moreover, he liked Angelica, and was well
disposed toward her. The rebuffs he had received, rude as they had been,
hadn’t either hurt or discouraged him. The Lord who had made him so
vulnerable to the charms of the fair sex had likewise provided him with
a sort of protective armour.

"Of course I’ll be your friend," said Angelica; "but I just must speak
to Vincent."

"I thought you had seen him," said the doctor. "You went up-stairs."

"I forgot to tell him something very important. If you don’t want me to
come, just make him come down here--please!"

She knew how to be meek enough to serve her ends.

"Please!" she said again, with all her cajolery. "Please, doctor! Just
get him to come down and speak to me through the door--just for an
instant!"

He hesitated.

"I want to do anything I can for you----”

"And wouldn’t you please just pay that cab?" she said. "I’m afraid he’ll
wait till you do."

He had a little money on hand, as it happened, and he was proud to be
able to play so gallant a rôle.

"With pleasure!" he said. "But then won’t you agree to postpone your
talk with Vincent?"

"I can’t!" she cried, piteously. "Oh, do please get him down!"

"Very well," he said, with a sigh and a smile.

She waited patiently, close to the screen. Everything was quiet. The
waiting chauffeur had shut off his engine and sat on the step of his
cab, smoking. Far away, from some other house, came the thumping rhythm
of a piano-player, and quite close to her the busy chirping of little
nocturnal insects.

Before very long, Vincent’s heavy tread sounded on the stairs. His big
body loomed up in the dim light of the hall, and drew near to her; but
he did not unlock the door. She suppressed a smile. He was afraid of
her--that big, masterful poet, forever proclaiming himself a _man_!

"Well!" he demanded, sternly, of the girl outside.

"I spoiled your letter," she said. "Eddie’ll never get it."

"What? I’ll write another----”

"You’d better not do that, Vincent. He wouldn’t be pleased with the way
you’ve acted."

"Perhaps not; but it’s my duty----”

"Don’t any of them know? Not your mother or any one?"

"Of course not. I’m not the sort to tell such a thing. If it wasn’t my
duty now, I wouldn’t."

"I thought it was to get money to help me out."

"Well--yes, partly; but he really ought to know, in case he still thinks
of marrying you."

"No," she said quietly. "He mustn’t know. Look here, Vincent! I’ve done
this one bad thing in my life. I never did anything bad before, and I
never will again; but if it was known, I’d never be forgiven. I’d never
get another chance--from any one; and I mean to have another chance.
It’s never going to be known. I’m not going to be ruined and wasted,
just for one--badness. It’s going to be wiped out, I tell you!"

"It will never be wiped out. You’ll never forget, Angelica--you’ll
never, never forget me. You can’t love again. You’ve lost heaven, my
girl."

She was still for a moment.

"Maybe I have," she said. "Maybe I have lost heaven. But," she went on,
"I’ll get what I can, anyway. I’m going to have my chance. Vincent!"

Her voice was so low that he had to press against the screen to hear
her; and her words came in an incredibly ferocious whisper, that turned
his blood cold:

"If ever you tell him, Vincent, I swear to Gawd I’ll kill you!"




CHAPTER FIVE


I

Through the front basement window Mrs. Kennedy saw Angelica returning, a
shockingly disheveled figure in the sweltering midday heat. She hurried
to the door, with the baby in her arms.

"Oh, Angie!" she cried. "You cruel, cruel, bad girl! Where have you
been? I’ve been near crazy, left alone here all night and morning with
the baby, and not a penny in the house. Of course I couldn’t do my
work----”

"Hush!" said Angelica, sternly. "Don’t bother me. I’m too tired. I had
to walk all the way back. Make me some tea!"

She took the child in her arms and sat down in the rocking-chair,
holding it pressed against her breast and staring over its head,
indifferent to its crying, and the feeble beating of its little hands.

She had her tea and bread with it; then she lay down on her cot, always
with the child in her arms, and fell asleep. Mrs. Kennedy looked in upon
them, saw them both quiet, the little, downy head resting against
Angelica’s shoulder, and she devoutly hoped that this period of rest
might solace her daughter after whatever demoniacal adventure she had
undergone that night. She picked up her pail and went out to work.

When she came in again at five o’clock, they were both gone.


II

Polly was reading, stretched out on the sofa of her charming little
room, near the window which gave her a fine view of the Hudson and a
cool breeze. Her maid had gone out, and she was quite alone in her
little flat, content and languid, rejoicing in her dignified solitude.

Here she was living as she liked to live, with her music, her books, her
very few and very casual friends, and long, long hours of delicate
idleness. She enjoyed the blissful serenity of a convalescent, or a
freed prisoner. After her two heart-breaking experiences of married
life, after the anguish of her dear child’s death, she was happy now to
be quite alone, to love no one, and to be hurt by no one. She wished to
spend the rest of her life alone.

Eddie had arranged her affairs so that she once more received her decent
little income. She didn’t enquire as to how he had done this. She
suspected that for the present it must be coming direct from his pocket,
but she preferred not to know.

She had a vague intention of some day divorcing Vincent, but she was
never capable of action without some spur. There wasn’t any cause now.
She was rid of him, and she had her money again. Her deepest
instinct--the instinct of a woman by temperament unfitted to make her
own way in the world--caused her to value her money above anything. It
meant all that was desirable in life--ease, dignity, and freedom.

How happy she was in her loose, fresh white wrapper, looking so much
younger, so much more charming--smoking her thin little cigarettes and
reading some book which entirely engaged her attention--agreeably
conscious, none the less, of a nice little supper left by her devoted
servant in the ice-box! It was only half-past five, but she was growing
hungry, and she was dallying with this idea of supper, when the
door-bell rang.

This was startling, for the boy in the hall down-stairs was supposed to
stop intruders and to telephone up to her before admitting them. And so
loud a ring!

Again! She got up and opened the door.

She gasped at the spectacle of Angelica with a baby in her arms.

"My _dear_ Angelica!" she cried. "I never----”

"Let me sit down," said Angelica. "I’m dead tired."

So she came into Polly’s tranquil sitting-room, as out of place there as
a wild animal--the fierce, rough Angelica with her wailing baby. She sat
down on the sofa and held the child up--a wretched, frail little
creature, with a wizen, troubled face.

"See him? Two months old."

"He’s sweet. But, my dear, I didn’t know you were married."

"I’m not married. Listen, Mrs. Geraldine! I got to have a talk with
you."

"Of course! But, my dear, isn’t there something you could do for your
baby? He seems so----”

"He’s sick. He’s sick all the time; but the doctor says if he gets good
care, there’s no reason why he shouldn’t grow up strong and all right.
It does make him kind of an extra trouble now, but after you’ve had him
here a few months, Mrs. Geraldine----”

"_I’ve_ had him _here_!"

"Listen!" cried Angelica, in anguish. "Please, please, Mrs. Geraldine,
don’t say no! Wait till you hear. Wait till you think. Think about that
baby you lost. Oh, do, for Gawd’s sake, Mrs. Geraldine, take this baby!"

"My dear girl!" cried Polly. "You must be mad! What in the world are you
talking about?"

"Oh, please, please, please, for Gawd’s sake! Just think of the poor
little feller you lost. Take this one instead. I _can’t_ keep him, Mrs.
Geraldine. He’ll only die. You’re too good and kind to let a little baby
die. You _got_ to take him. You’ll never have a moment’s peace, night or
day, if you don’t!"

"But, Angelica, it’s outrageous!"

"I don’t know the words to use. I don’t know how to make you. Oh, Mrs.
Geraldine, I can only just beg and pray to you to take him!"

"My dear, I’ll help you, if I can. I’ll be glad to lend you money, or
help you in any other way."

"No--I can’t keep him. You see, Mrs. Geraldine, I’m going to marry
Eddie, and I can’t ever let him know about this."

"Angelica!" cried Polly, aghast. "I certainly won’t help you to deceive
Eddie."

"I know; but it would be much, much worse to tell him. He’s crazy about
me, and I can make him happy. This is the only wrong thing I’ve ever
done, _ever_, and I’m never going to do another. I’m going to be good as
gold, Mrs. Geraldine. If Eddie knew, he’d never forgive me. I’d never
get a chance to be good. That’s why I came to you. On account of Eddie,
won’t you do it to make him happy?"

"I could _not_ deceive Eddie."

"Oh, _why_ not? Why, for Gawd’s sake, tell the truth and spoil Eddie’s
life, and be the death of this poor little feller and the ruin of me?
Oh, just take him! Take him!" she cried, tears running down her cheeks.
"You’ll love him. You’ll be awful glad to feel him next to you in bed,
first thing in the morning. You’ll love him so. You’re the only one I
know in the world that I wouldn’t mind leaving him with. I know he cries
an awful lot, but that’s because he’s sick; and if you take him, and he
has the best of everything, he’ll soon be fat and well, and you’ll be
proud of him. Oh, say you will!"

Tears stood in Polly’s eyes.

"My dear, you mustn’t give up your child. I’ll help you, so that you can
keep him."

"No, no! I can’t! I’m going to marry Eddie."

"Give up the idea. Go off somewhere and live quietly with your dear
little baby."

"No! You can’t support me and him both. It would just be me and mommer
over again--me going out by the day to keep him alive, and the two of
us having nothing--no chances, no nothing. That’s if he’d even live. No;
the only, only thing is for you to take him."

"But, Angelica, what in the world would I do with him?"

"Get a good nurse. I’ll find one, if you want, from a hospital."

"But what would people say?"

"Say he’s yours. No one would know the difference. Tell Eddie he’s
yours. Tell Vincent, too."

"Vincent wouldn’t believe it."

"Well, he could say so, anyway. My Gawd, that’s little enough to do for
the poor little feller!"

"It’s not a little thing, Angelica--it’s a great deal, to expect Vincent
to say he is your child’s father."

"Well, he is!" said Angelica. "I forgot to tell you that."




CHAPTER SIX


I

"It seems to be my fate," said Polly to herself, "to be always forgiving
and benefiting those that despitefully use me. Imagine me taking this
child--Vincent’s child--and not feeling the least resentment toward
Angelica. I’m only sorry for her."

She was watching the baby lying on the lap of a lively and capable young
nurse, whom she had got by telephone.

"I’m going to adopt this child," she had explained to the young woman.
"His mother can’t keep him."

"It’s a risk," said the nurse. "You never know how they’ll turn out; but
he’s a pretty little fellow--big gray eyes and all. He’s been badly fed,
but I guess we can build him up."

Polly lapsed into a strange, an inexpressible mood. Vincent’s baby!
Wasn’t it really sent to her to take the place of the one she had so
cruelly lost? She certainly didn’t intend to pass the child off as her
own, but she would adopt it and bring it up. She would love it. The
starved and thwarted love which no one else wanted welled up in her
heart.

"He’ll be a lot of trouble to you," said the nurse, looking about the
orderly, pretty little place. "You certainly are good to take such a
burden on yourself."

"I lost a little child of my own," said Polly.

And a dreadful pity for herself, and for Angelica, came over her.

She might well be sorry for Angelica, going out of the house without
that little burden in her arms.

This was the supreme hour of Angelica’s punishment--the inhuman
struggle between her heart and her brain. She did not look upon it as a
punishment, however; she looked upon this horrible renunciation of her
child as a part of the price she was obliged to pay for a magnificent
future. She was bent, resolute, with all the savage resolution of her
lawless soul, to marry Eddie and to obtain all that she so desired. If
she must sacrifice her child, then she would do so, though it left a
wound never to be healed.

She didn’t seek for happiness; if it had been that she wanted, she would
have kept her little baby. She was ready and willing to give up
happiness for success. She wished to vindicate herself, to give proof to
the world of the power which she knew to be within herself.

Oh, to be going home alone, with empty arms! It was too cruel! She
longed for the feel of that little body, for the sound of its feeble
voice, for its eyes looking up at her in pain and innocence. She walked
through the streets with streaming eyes, running against people,
indifferent to abuse or remonstrance.

"I _can’t_ go home without him!" she gasped. "Oh, my little feller! I
can’t go home and see his little clothes--and his empty basket!"

She stopped short.

"No!" she said. "I can’t do this. I thought I could, but I can’t. I got
to have him back. I’d rather he died home with me. Oh, I wish we _were_
dead, the two of us, dead and buried--him and me in one grave!"

She turned and retraced her long road to Polly’s house, as far as the
door; but she did not go in.

"No! Him in there with a trained nurse--no! I’ll give him his chance, my
poor little feller; and I’ll give myself a chance, too," she added. She
started down-town again; but the nearer she got to home, the more
unbearable was the idea of entering there, alone.

"If only I was over this first night!" she moaned. "If I could only just
forget him till to-morrow!"


II

Mrs. Kennedy kept on working. She didn’t dare to stop, to give herself a
moment to think.

They were both gone. Very well! She would simply expect them back,
resolutely refusing to think where they had gone, what they might be
doing. At five o’clock in the afternoon she began to clean her flat.
Then she cooked a nice little supper and set it in the oven to keep
warm. She mixed condensed milk and water in a bottle for the baby. She
boiled its dirty clothes. Then, in a desperate search for work to do,
she found an old pair of white shoes of Angelica’s, and began to clean
them, singing all the while in a weird, cracked voice:

"_Af_-ter the ball is _o_-ver, af-_ter_ the ball is done."

She was trying with all her might to keep out of her head a terrible
vision of a young mother standing on a bridge at night, with her baby in
her arms.

Still humming, she went into the bedroom, undressed, and got into bed,
in a waking nightmare, half hypnotizing herself with her monotonous
little song. She was too far gone even to feel relieved when at last she
heard Angelica’s footsteps in the hall, heard her go into the kitchen
and light the gas. Then silence. She lay listening for the baby’s cry;
there wasn’t a sound.

"What can she be doing in there?" she thought. "And what makes the baby
so quiet?"

Fear struggled against the lethargy that engulfed her. She got up, went
to the kitchen, and stood in the doorway in her long, old-fashioned
nightgown, regarding her child. Angelica sat beside the table, with a
small box in her lap.

"Angie! Where’s the baby?" cried her mother.

"Gone," said Angelica. "I got a lady to take him."

"Your own child?" screamed her mother. "Your own little baby? Oh, shame
on you!"

"Shut up! You don’t understand. Do you think I liked to give him away?"

"Then get him back! Get him back, Angie! I’ll work for him till I drop.
Don’t give him up!"

"He’s gone, I tell you. Let me alone! Can’t you see how I feel?"

"Then why, why, why did you do it, Angie?"

Angelica stared at her somberly.

"I don’t know," she said. "I had to. I thought it would be the best
thing for him. She--the woman that’s taken him--she can do a lot for
him. She’s kind and good. You’d like her."

"Who is she?"

Angelica did not intend to tell. She was too well aware of the
preposterousness of having taken Vincent’s child to his wife.

"No one you know," she said.

Her mother was completely softened by this new idea, that Angelica had
given up her dearly loved child for its own good.

"You poor girl!" she said. "I suppose you meant to do what was best for
him. But----”

"I thought it would help me, too," said Angelica. "I couldn’t keep him."

Mrs. Kennedy was shocked. She opened her mouth to speak again, but
Angelica stopped her with a quick gesture.

"No more!" she said. "I’ve had enough. Now you better go back to bed."

"I don’t want to leave you," said her mother. She could imagine how
hideous would be Angelica’s loneliness.

"You better!"

"Why? What are you going to do?"

Angelica held up her tiny box.

"Heroin," she said. "I got it off a feller I know. I don’t want to think
about anything to-night."

For an instant the small figure in the long night-dress wavered; then,
with a pitiful scream, she ran out of the room and cast herself on her
bed.

"It’s too much, God!" she cried. "I can’t bear any more. Take me
to-night, oh, merciful God!"


III

Mrs. Kennedy listened in vain all through the night. From time to time
she dozed, to wake with a start of fright. She had no knowledge of
drugs, only horrible superstitions. She expected Angelica to be changed
in some way beyond recognition. Would she be violent--fight and struggle
with her? Would she kill herself--set the house on fire?

At dawn she waked from a brief nap, resentful to find herself still
alive. Sick with apprehension, weary beyond all measure, she went into
the kitchen, to see what had become of her child.

Angelica was asleep, with her head on the table. Beside her lay her tiny
package, unopened.

She raised her head and looked at her mother with dark and heavy eyes.

"All right, mommer!" she said. "It’s over!"

"What? What’s over?"

"All of--of that. I’m going to start all over again."

"You can’t, Angie. You can’t undo what’s done."

"I have," she said solemnly. "I’ve just wiped it out. I haven’t done any
harm to any one but myself, and I’m going to forget that. All the traces
of it are gone. Eddie’ll never know; and so he’ll be happy! I have
undone it, mommer; it’s just the same now as if _that_ had never
happened."

Her mother, shivering, racked by her night’s anguish, looked sternly at
her.

"That’s because you don’t know," she said. "You don’t know yet what
you’ve done!"




CHAPTER SEVEN


I

Mrs. Kennedy made no preparation for going to work that day. She
suffered from a strange, an inexplicable malady. She didn’t want to go
to bed. She sat upright in a rocking-chair, still in her night-dress,
staring at the kitchen wall before her with a faint little frown.

Angelica washed and dressed herself neatly, and got ready some
breakfast--not very quickly, for she wasn’t accustomed to cooking, but
with the care and deftness that were so natural to her. It was, when
done, a daintier and better meal than her mother had ever served.

"Now, mommer!" she said. "Come on! Sit down!"

"I can’t eat, Angelica."

"You can drink some coffee, anyway."

And she took her mother by the hand and led her to the table--a poor,
frail, barefooted little thing, with her gray hair hanging about her
haggard face.

"Sit down," said Angelica again. "Now, then!"

Her mother drank a cup of coffee greedily, and gave her familiar little
sigh.

"That _was_ nice!" she said.

Her daughter succeeded in making her eat a little as well.

"Now you got to lie down," she said.

"I can’t. I’ve got to clean the halls."

"I’ll do it, mommer."

"Nonsense, Angelica! You don’t know a thing about it."

"I guess I can learn. Go on, mommer, lie down!"

She straightened the bed and patted the thin little pillow.

"Now, mommer, tell me! How do you do it? Where do you start?"

"Angie, I can’t let you. You’re tired to death, child. I’m more used to
it."

But Angelica would not listen to her. She went out, resolutely, with the
pail and the cloth and the scrubbing-brush, to do for her mother for one
day what her mother had done for her for nineteen years.

It was not Angelica’s disposition to enjoy martyrdom. She never felt
sorry for herself; she didn’t now. It was work which must be done, and
she was anxious to do it properly. She was in that state of intense
fatigue when one craves more and more physical activity. She scrubbed
all the stone stairs, mopped the corridor, went on working and working
and thinking and thinking.

She came down-stairs at one o’clock and went out to buy something for
lunch.

"What is there to do this afternoon?" she asked.

"Nothing," said Mrs. Kennedy. "I haven’t got half the work to do in this
place that I had in the old one--only three washings."

"I know. Well, mommer, I suppose we’ll have to get some more money from
somewhere. I’ll go out and look for a job, I guess."

She found one without much trouble. Her sort of job--unskilled,
transitory, ill-paid--was plentiful.

"I’m starting in to-morrow morning," she told her mother, when she came
home. "Now, if there’s any ink, I guess I’ll write to Eddie."

"Why?" asked her mother.

"Well, it seems he don’t know anything about--what happened, and I guess
we’ll be married after all."

"You mean to say you’re still set on that, Angie?" cried her mother.
"It’s wicked--downright _wicked_--to deceive a good man so."

"I don’t think so," Angelica replied. "What I did was bad enough, but I
don’t think it’s wicked not to tell about it. If you’d been in prison
you wouldn’t go around telling every one about it, would you?"

"That isn’t the same at all, Angie. I don’t want you to tell ‘every
one’; only the man you’re going to marry."

"He wouldn’t be the man I’m going to marry very long, if I tell him.
He’d never speak to me again. I know Eddie! And he’s too good to lose,"
she added. "Of course, something may go wrong, but I don’t think so. I
think I’ve got him!"

So she wrote:

DEAR EDDIE:

     I guess you think it is very queer not hearing from me for nearly a
     year. I did not think I would write to you, because when I thought
     it over I thought I better not marry you. I thought maybe we could
     not get on, on account of being so different, but I have changed my
     mind, and now I will if you still want. Let me know if you feel the
     same about it, and then I will write again and tell you all about
     how I am getting along. I have not got any letters from you,
     because we moved away from the old place, and I was sick a long
     time, and did not go up there to see if there were any letters, and
     then when I got well and did go the woman there was very cranky and
     said she gave them all back to the postman because I did not leave
     any address behind.

     Well, let me hear how you feel about this.

                                                              ANGELICA.

"Now!" she said as she dropped it into the box. "Now, if only, _only_ I
can have my chance!"


II

One might imagine that her mother would be pleased with the new and
complete change that came over Angelica--her third phase, so to speak;
but she wasn’t. This cool, quiet resolution seemed to Mrs. Kennedy more
profoundly immoral than all her daughter’s past wildness. It would be a
horrible thing, it would upset all her universe, if she were forced to
see such guilt as Angelica’s going undiscovered and forgotten.

Even a sinful life would have seemed to her more hopeful, for it would
have presupposed a girl driven to desperation by shame and remorse; but
Angelica going off to her work in the morning, neat and alert, her
old-time swagger supplanted by a steely self-assurance, was an outrage.
She was actually ambitious, too; she didn’t seem to know that her life
was ruined and ended. She studied in the evening, writing exercises,
learning things by heart, going at the English tongue, spelling,
composition, and literature as the books decreed, fiercely concentrated
upon her work. She wouldn’t go to the movies, or to take a walk; she
wouldn’t even talk; she just sat there, with her books.

Her efforts at self-improvement were not touching, had nothing of
stumbling pathos about them. She was too clever, too careful. She
learned to dress with quiet precision, without paint, without flamboyant
allure. She learned to speak better, she stopped swearing, except under
great provocation; she even learned to control her temper to a degree
that alarmed her mother. The hot, sudden anger was there--it came as
readily as ever; but it was still now. She didn’t "fly out." And all
this disturbed and exasperated Mrs. Kennedy. She had no sympathy for any
of it.

"Whatever in the world do you expect to _do_?" she asked irritably, one
evening, while Angelica sat reading a paper book on etiquette.

"I’m going to be as good as the best of them," said Angelica. "Why
shouldn’t I be?"

"Plenty of reason why you shouldn’t!" said her mother tartly.

But the wicked continued to prosper, until Mrs. Kennedy almost believed
that God gave no justice.

One day a letter came for Angelica. This startled her mother, for they
never got letters.

"It’s from him," she thought. "Bad news, maybe!"

But it was postmarked New York; it couldn’t be from Eddie.

"Now, whoever in the world can be writing to Angie!" she thought,
alarmed and uneasy, as she always was over the girl’s mysterious
activities. However she might regard Angelica’s moral shortcomings, she
loved her only child. She knew that she deserved punishment, but she
would have given her own life to save her from it.

Directly Angie came in from work she handed her the letter.

"Oh, Gawd!" she muttered. "Mommer! It’s from her--the one that’s got the
baby."

Her face was ghastly. Perhaps, after all, she hadn’t escaped so easily
as her mother imagined. Perhaps, after all, she longed for her child and
missed it with immeasurable bitterness, like any human mother.

Angelica couldn’t bear to open the letter. For what other reason would
Polly write to her but to tell her of the baby’s illness or death? She
had warmly urged Angelica to come whenever she wished to see the child,
but Angelica had refused. She didn’t want to see him there with Polly.
She wished to--she must--look upon him as utterly lost to her. Once in a
while she was overcome with longing, and would telephone simply to ask
after him, and, reassured, would resolutely turn her mind away. But if
he were really gone, no longer in the world!

She opened the letter at last, and the very sight of it, before her
brain had grasped its meaning, comforted her--the neatly formed letters,
the friendly look of the page:

DEAR ANGELICA:

     Dress yourself in your very nicest and go to see Miss Sillon in her
     shop, "Fine Feathers," on the south side of Washington Square. I
     spoke to her about you, and I believe there is a very good
     opportunity there for you. They want a milliner--some one to take a
     small salary and a share in the profits. They are nice girls, and
     you’ll enjoy being with them. I really think it is just what you
     want. Anyway, try it, won’t you? And let me know if it suits.

                                           Your friend, as always,

                                                       POLLY GERALDINE.
     P. S.--He is doing splendidly.

Angelica read the letter to her mother, all but the signature, and ate
her supper in silence.

"Sit down, mommer," she said. "I’ll wash the dishes. I guess I’ll lay
off for a while to-morrow and go and see about this thing."


III

It was Angelica at her newest and best who walked across Fourth Street
the next morning. She had for a long time sternly withheld most of her
wages from her mother, who needed the money for vital necessities, and
had bought herself a decent outfit, to go with her new soul. She was
plainly dressed, but no longer with a trace of shabbiness. She wore a
neat dark suit, a black sailor hat, good boots and gloves. Her swagger
was gone, and so was her provocative and insolent glance; she had a
sobriety and decorum quite beyond reproach.

She saw the shop, and entered. It was a small private house, dilapidated
and moribund, fitted out with purple and white striped curtains at the
windows and a great sign-board over the front gate--a wooden peacock,
brilliantly colored, with ‘Fine Feathers’ painted in bold black letters
across it. The shop was what had once been a front parlour--a long,
narrow room with a marble mantelpiece and an ornate ceiling. It was
furnished now, with great audacity, solely by four kitchen chairs
painted white, with round purple cushions on them, a table on which were
strewn original designs for wraps and dresses done in crayons, and a
fine pair of black velvet portières concealing the back room. Four long
mirrors were set into the walls.

The owners were both poor and clever. They knew well that this childish
brightness would be thought artistic, original, and distinguished by the
greatly desirable bourgeoisie, and that the more sophisticated would be
amused. As for Angelica, she was impressed.

A tall young girl with fluffy red hair hastened in from the back room.

"Yes?" she asked, with non-committal amiability.

"Mrs. Geraldine sent me," said Angelica, "I’d like to see Miss Sillon,
please."

"Oh! I’m Miss Devery, but I’ll do. I’m the partner. I’ve heard about
you. Millinery, isn’t it?"

"Yes," said Angelica, confidently.

"Sit down, won’t you? We can talk it over a bit. Miss Sillon will be in
presently. You see, Miss Sillon and I just started this place six months
ago, but we’re doing so well that we feel justified in branching out a
bit. So we thought of a millinery department. We were speaking of it to
Mrs. Geraldine--she’s one of our oldest customers, you know--and she
said she knew just the person. She said you were a wonder at hats."

Angelica smiled a little. She was surprised and delighted by this pretty
red-haired girl with her naïve air and babyish voice--a lady, if ever
there was one, and yet so simple and friendly with Angelica. She wanted
greatly to work in that purple and white room with her.

"Now," said Miss Devery, "I’ll tell you what we can do. We’d let you
have both the windows, to display your hats; and that’s worth something.
Then we’d give you ten per cent of all the sales you make, and provide
the materials as well. We have lots of scraps and odds and ends; so
you’d be under no expense at all."

"But I’d have to have a salary to start with."

Miss Devery bit her lip doubtfully.

"Well, you see," she said candidly, "we’re rather short of cash. We’ve
made quite a bit, but after we’ve paid our living expenses we turn it
all back into the business. We’re growing fast, and if you come in with
us now you’ll really have a splendid chance. We have a perfectly fine
connection, you know--some of the very nicest people."

"But----” began Angelica, and stopped short. "I’d like to think it
over," she said. "How long can I take?"

"Why, a week, if you wish; but I hope you’ll come. You’re just the sort
of girl we want. We don’t commercialize the thing. We want to keep it
_nice_."

Angelica smiled again with a dreary sort of triumph. So she had fooled
one of the nice ones, anyway!

"Of course," went on Miss Devery, "if you’d rather, you could provide a
little capital and your own materials, and we’d let you right in with
us. Miss Sillon would show you the books and so on."

Angelica had risen. She could see her own reflection in one of the long
mirrors, and she could not help feeling that she really looked more of a
lady than the girl who actually was one.

"I’ll let you know," she said, carefully. She was fearfully tempted to
try, just for once, to talk as they did. "It’s awfully attractive," she
said. "I’d love to go into it with you; but I want to talk it over with
mother."

It succeeded! Miss Devery noticed nothing at all strange in her tone or
her words.

"Telephone just as soon as you decide, won’t you?" she said.


IV

Mrs. Kennedy wasn’t in the flat when Angelica got home. She was
up-stairs, cleaning a vacant flat, and thither Angelica followed her.
She was scrubbing the pan of a gas-stove--a vilely dirty thing, heavily
incrusted with grease and slime, in which were embedded dead matches and
bits of food.

"Mother!"

The unaccustomed word surprised her. She turned to look into Angelica’s
face smiling down at her.

"Mother, will you support me for a while?"

"Why, child, of course! I’ll do whatever I can for you. Have you lost
your job?"

"No, but I’m going to try something new. It may not bring in anything
much for quite a while, but I think after a time it’ll be a regular
gold-mine. And it’s very _nice_. I know Eddie would like me to do it!"




CHAPTER EIGHT


I

She hadn’t allowed herself to think about Eddie’s reply. She insisted to
herself that it would be, must be, favourable; but when the letter came,
when at last she held it in her hand, she was panic-stricken. She
reverted.

"Oh, Gawd!" she murmured. "What if he’s changed his mind?"

This is what she read:

MY DEAREST GIRL:

     You can’t possibly imagine how I felt when I got your letter. I was
     still in the hospital where I had been for five months with a bad
     foot, and, to tell you the truth, I didn’t care much whether I ever
     went out of it again. I can’t explain it very well, but there is
     something about the war and this filthy, brutal way of living that
     makes it unbearable to lose any pleasures or joys out of life. You
     get to believe that nothing matters except being happy. And you
     _are_ my happiness. When I thought I’d lost you, I didn’t care
     about going on. Of course, there’s your country, and your family,
     and your ambition, and so on, but somehow they don’t seem _real_. I
     thought of you all the time. I wrote and wrote, and didn’t get any
     answer. Then I asked Vincent to look you up, but he wrote that
     you’d moved and he couldn’t trace you. I don’t quite see how I
     could have gone back on the firing-line again if you hadn’t
     written. It’s bad enough anyway, but it wouldn’t be bearable
     without some sort of guiding star. Don’t think I’m getting
     sentimental, Angelica, but you are that, you know, to me.

     I hope this will soon be over. It’s worse than I thought it would
     be; but I’m glad I came. I wouldn’t like other fellows to be doing
     this job for me. But when I get home! It seems like a vision of
     Paradise--you waiting for me, and my home, and good food and a
     nice, clean bed, and hot water!

     I don’t want you to think that I’ve deteriorated, that I’m always
     thinking of physical things, because I’m not. When you’re always
     uncomfortable, you can’t help thinking too much about comfort; but
     I think much more about other things. I think a lot about what is
     the best way to use a life. I can see lots of things I’ve done
     wrong. I look forward awfully to making a fresh start. It will all
     seem so new, like being born again. Everything will seem remarkable
     and interesting--all sort of things I didn’t use to notice.

     And to think that there was a time when I used to think quite
     calmly about being married to you! Of course, my dear, I always did
     look forward to it as the greatest possible happiness, but I more
     or less took it for granted--the sort of happiness a fellow always
     expects. But now, Angelica, it seems as wonderful and beautiful and
     far off as heaven. I can’t even really believe that I’ll see you
     ever again. I’ve got so used to being a lousy, muddy, hunted animal
     that I can’t believe it will ever end. I don’t even long for the
     end; it seems so impossible. I have a damnable conviction--an
     obsession, I suppose they’d call it--that every one gets killed in
     the war. So many of the chaps I knew have gone, often killed beside
     me--and in the hospital, dying so sickeningly! I can’t help
     imagining that every one in the world is dying. So that the idea of
     coming home and marrying you is--I can’t describe what it is.
     Really and literally a dream of heaven.

     Angelica, darling, don’t disappoint me again! I couldn’t bear it.
     Write to me faithfully, as often as possible--even every day. It
     wouldn’t be much to do, for you who are at home and safe and
     comfortable.

                                                 With all my heart,

                                                                 EDDIE.

Now this letter might have disappointed another girl, but not Angelica.
She didn’t at all mind its being so little lover-like, so much concerned
with Eddie and his feelings, and so little concerned with herself. She
was, in fact, very proud that such a learned and serious young man as
Eddie should write to her at all. She was overjoyed, exultant, to see
that he still wanted her--with a sort of humility in her joy quite
unusual in her.

"I won’t disappoint him ever again!" she cried. "I’ll do my very best.
I’ll just _live_ for him! And if it’s like a dream of heaven to him,"
she reflected, "so it is to me. I’ve suffered, too. It couldn’t have
been much worse for any one, anywhere. Oh, won’t it be heaven to be
_safe_--to be his wife, and settled there at Buena Vista, and rich, and
every one looking up to me? A motor-car of my own, and lovely clothes,
and a beautiful room! I’ll have Miss Sillon and Miss Devery out to see
me."

She looked at herself in the mirror.

"I’m getting to look refined," she thought; "not factory any more. When
I can have real grand clothes, I’ll be _beautiful_! Vincent said I lost
heaven when I stopped loving him," she reflected. "Well, I’ll get it
back again, with Eddie!"


II

In spite of his entreaty, she waited for more than a week before she
replied to Eddie’s letter, for she wished to have something to tell him.
She spent two entire evenings over her letter, and when it was done
there was hardly a mistake in it, in spelling, in grammar, or in
sentiment; for Angelica was fast learning the correct way to feel.

DEAR EDDIE:

     Your letter was wonderful, and I could not write one nearly so
     good, or so interesting. I understand how you feel, but I do not
     know how to say anything. I feel like that, too, afraid to expect
     any happiness, but I want to fight for it. I want to tell God that
     I will not be cheated, and that it has all got to come out right.

     I go to the movies with mother whenever there is a war picture, to
     try and get some idea what it is like over there, but I guess no
     one can. That is another thing I don’t dare to think about--all
     that you must be suffering. But, Eddie dear, I will try my best to
     make it up to you when you get back.

     I don’t go to the factory any more, but I have a very nice place as
     a milliner with two girls who have a shop in Washington Square. I
     am doing nicely. I design the hats myself and make them, and Miss
     Sillon says it will not be long before my hats are recognized
     everywhere in New York. "Angélique," I call myself on the label I
     sew in the hats. She says they are almost too daring, but very
     original.

She wanted to write more--much more--about her hats, but she knew it
wouldn’t do. She was required to fill up the letter with general
observations and with her interest in Eddie, and she did so.

She was pleased with this letter, and yet it troubled her. She felt both
mean and cruel. She knew that she had nothing to give Eddie; she knew
that in every way she was defrauding and injuring him. To stifle her
distress she had only her profound faith in herself, her conviction that
she had obliterated the past and could and would make a glorious future.
She couldn’t help contrasting her laboured and prudent letter with his
careless candour. Evidently he didn’t care what he said. He just wrote
her what came to his mind. He felt so sure of her!

"I haven’t really done him any harm," she protested, lying awake in the
dark. "If he never knows, it’s just exactly the same--for him--as if it
had never happened."

And still she knew that she was forcing him to play the part he would
have hated and rejected beyond any other--that of the poor dishonoured
fool. She didn’t even love him.

"I’ll learn to love him!" she cried. "I love him a little bit already."

And still she knew how much she disliked even the memory of his kisses.

Sometimes a wave of sheer terror overcame her.

"No one’s ever done such a thing," she thought, remembering all the
stories she had read. "It can’t be done. Somehow--some day--it would be
found out. It always is!"

But this she could combat.

"I don’t care if it’s never been done!" she would cry. "_I’ll_ do it!
I’ll marry Eddie, and he’ll _never know_, and it’ll all end happily.
I’ll make it! I _won’t_ be found out!"




CHAPTER NINE


I

Angelica’s new business suited her exactly. It absorbed her mind, and it
trained and shaped and educated her to an extraordinary degree. Her
bravado vanished when she no longer felt herself inferior; now that she
was openly acknowledged to be a clever and rising young woman, she had
no need of her old-time self-assertion. She throve in an atmosphere of
praise. Miss Sillon and Miss Devery loved her and her brilliant hats.
They lauded her, petted her, and took all possible means to advance her
interests, because they liked her, and because her interests and theirs
were inseperable.

Miss Devery, who was the artistic member of the firm, went outside in a
purple linen smock one morning and put a crêpe paper hat on the peacock.
As often as the rain soaked it, or the wind tore or carried it off, she
fastened on another. It was very odd and whimsical, and it suited the
unique character of their shop.

This unique character was their chief stock in trade, and they both knew
very well how to use it to advantage.

"The awfully chic, exclusive thing has really been overdone," Miss
Sillon told Angelica. "All the people with money are crazy now for
anything they imagine is artistic and quaint. They think it shows that
they’re artistic to like such things; and just now, of course, it’s
_the_ thing to be artistic."

She was a complete contrast to the dimpled, red-haired Miss Devery, with
her air of polite amusement. She was a short, energetic, very dark
little body, lively, talkative, and witty.

"I’m a perfect dressmaker," she told Angelica. "God made me so. Just to
look at me makes people turn red with shame and make up their minds on
the spot to have something nice and new and trim."

Angelica acknowledged that never had she seen a better-dressed woman, or
a neater one.

"I dye my hair and lace as tight as I dare," Miss Sillon continued, "but
I do it with pride and vainglory. I boldly call it a duty. I tell these
silly women it’s the most important thing in life to keep oneself
looking one’s best, and they always agree. Not one of them ever had the
sense to inquire what it’s done for _me_. Here I’ve been looking my best
for forty years, and look at me, still digging away for a living, while
these wretched, slovenly little chits with holes in their stockings and
all their buttons off are settled down with fine husbands and babies and
everything else they want! Look at Devery--sloppy kid! She’s never
without a man hanging about after her."

Devery smiled.

"They’re mostly bad ones," she said. "Dishonourable intentions,
sometimes, but generally _no_ intentions at all. I don’t get no
‘forrader,’ Sillon. But this Angélique--she’s the one! She’s just made
for a millionaire’s bride."

Miss Sillon turned to stare at her.

"Devery," she said suddenly, "she’s not quaint enough. Get to work and
make her quaint!"

"That I can’t do. She’s not built along quaint lines; but I’ll make her
bizarre."

So Miss Devery set to work. She designed and made for Angelica an
extraordinary dress of dark red jersey cloth that fitted her like a
snake-skin, as she said. It was entirely plain and severe, with long
sleeves and a skirt reaching to her ankles. It made her look lean, tall,
and savage. Then she parted her hair in the middle and knotted it low on
her neck, hung big gold earrings in her ears, and around her neck a
string of cloudy pale-green beads reaching to her knees. When all this
was done, she called in Miss Sillon.

"_Now!_" she said. "_What_, eh?"

"Barbaric," said Miss Sillon; "but Lord, how attractive the creature is!
Seriously, though," she added, "do you think she fits in with our nice
little quaintness? She’s positively terrible!"

"A new thing in milliners," said Miss Devery. "Sillon, I’m proud! She’s
my masterpiece."

"Very well," said Miss Sillon. "We won’t touch her. She shall stand as
you have made her; but, Angélique, my child, _how_ you will have to
design to keep up with your appearance!"

"I can do it," said Angelica firmly. "I’ve got some fine ideas."

For what had she been doing of late but visiting the Public Library and
studying the lives of all of Eddie’s magnificent women whom she could
remember, and, from their portraits, gleaning the suggestions upon which
she later worked?

She was supremely happy at her work. To sit sewing with Miss Devery and
Miss Sillon all the morning, listening to their bright and jolly talk,
and entering into it, was unfailing delight. They quite frankly admired
her brains and her beauty, and treated her exactly as one of themselves.
If they saw any difference, anything inferior in her, they concealed it.

Angelica felt that they didn’t know, that they imagined her to be of the
same class as themselves. It didn’t occur to her that they didn’t care;
that so long as she behaved herself with amiability and good sense, and
was of value in their business, they were in no way concerned about her
grammar or her table manners. She imagined that they were always looking
for signs of good breeding, signs of bad breeding, little tricks she
hadn’t learned yet. She used to read all that sort of thing in the
women’s magazines, and she often discovered, to her deep distress, that
she had been doing horrible things, even in the presence of Devery and
Sillon. She had, for instance, put on her gloves in the street; she had
said "phone" and "auto," and still they remained friendly.

They were a type entirely novel to her; she had not even read of their
sort. Well-born and well-educated English-women, they had knocked about
the world to an amazing extent. There was very little they didn’t know,
although there was a very great deal they chose to ignore in life.

Miss Devery was the youngest in a family of nine--children of a poor
clergyman in the south of England. She had begun her career as a
governess in a French family. Leaving that, she had drifted about in
Paris, studied drawing a little, and given English lessons, always
charming and gay and perfectly at home. Then she had gone to a married
brother in Australia, and after a few years of that, helping his wife
with her babies on their sheep-farm, she had followed the commands of
her own sweet and careless heart and gone to America. And here she was,
at twenty-six, quite alone in the world, half-forgotten by her people at
home, who were rather fond of her, but couldn’t keep her in mind.

Miss Sillon was different. Her father was a doctor who had ruined
himself with drink, and she had had monstrous responsibilities and cares
upon her shoulders ever since childhood, when her mother had died. God
knows what she hadn’t tried, to earn her honest bread. She had been a
children’s nurse in London, stewardess on a South American ship,
librarian in a Canadian city; she had worked in a newspaper office and
in a bakery, she had taught music in a suburban school. She was also
entirely alone on earth, but it didn’t trouble her.

Both she and Miss Devery would have been able to pick up a living in
any part of the civilized world. They were attached to each other,
without being quite aware of their affection. They had met one day at a
cheap lunch-room, and had rushed together like two morsels of
quicksilver. Why not? They were more than harmonious; they were in
essence identical.


II

How bitterly Mrs. Kennedy missed her wayward and troublesome child, who
had ordered her about and sworn at her, and so vehemently kissed her!
This neat young woman, busy at her books in the kitchen every evening,
always up and dressed at the right time in the morning, was a stranger,
was in no way hers. She would sit in the rocking-chair--after the
kitchen was clean and tidy--and take up the newspaper Angelica had
brought in, or perhaps a magazine, and pretend to read; but she never
could. She had no habit of reading. Her great need was to talk.

She would look at her daughter, and rock and sigh. A weary world, where
even rest had lost its beauty!

There were sometimes evenings when Miss Sillon and Miss Devery invited
Angelica to go with them to one of the little Italian restaurants in the
neighbourhood. In this case Angelica was always punctilious to telephone
to her mother, and she was never out later than ten, so that it didn’t
occur to her to pity the wretched woman.

She didn’t imagine how terrible those evenings were to Mrs. Kennedy, how
she groped about the kitchen, blinded by tears, setting out her tiny
meal, finding relief in loud sobs like hiccoughs. She saw that something
was the matter with her mother, but she fancied that it was age, ill
health, poverty, years of hardship.

It was none of these pains which so grievously afflicted Mrs. Kennedy.
It was because she was being left behind. She who had all her life
feared and foreseen that she would be obliged to die and leave her
beloved child, now saw this child--as she had known her--quite dead and
gone, and herself left desolate.




CHAPTER TEN


I

There was one particular day--a sort of seventh wave in her steady tide
of success--that Angelica always remembered. To begin with, when she
reached Fine Feathers, there was what Miss Devery had promised her
should be there--‘ANGÉLIQUE,’ in purple letters across the two front
windows. She stopped in the street to admire it, in delight, almost in
awe. So far had she come, with such celerity--she, the one-time factory
worker! It hardly seemed possible!

She lingered to think of her present magic life, so full of delights and
satisfactions; her days filled with this work that she loved, handling
the silks, the satins, the velvets, the plumes, the rhinestones, all the
rich and vivid things she so adored; the chatter of Devery and Sillon,
which never failed to entertain her; the very feeling of being an
independent and promising young business woman, with an account well
started in a savings-bank. She thought of the charmed evenings she
sometimes spent with her partners--dinner at a near-by table d’hôte, and
then a seat in the second balcony, to see some play which they had
selected. She thought of those long, quiet evenings of study at home, in
the tidy kitchen, with the clock that ticked so loudly on the tin tubs.

She was able now to give her mother a respectable sum every week. She
was, in fact, rapidly becoming the most important member of the ‘Fine
Feathers’ establishment, and she had some time ago entered into a new
and far more advantageous arrangement with Miss Sillon. Devery and
Sillon were clever and good workwomen, and they had built up a nice
little business for themselves; but Angelica was something beyond
that--she was the one person especially adapted at that instant of time
to design hats which would superlatively please the women of that
particular city.

She catered to women with money, of course. She raised her prices
fantastically; and when women came in, shamefaced and apologetic because
of the fierce denunciations of the war posters they saw outside, she
knew just what to say.

"Yes, madam," she agreed. "A hundred and fifty dollars _is_ a large
price for a simple little hat. Of course you can get some sort of thing
for ten." She who not so long ago had been used to buy one for a dollar
and trim it with all sorts of little scraps! "But it’s much more
economical to get _one_ really _good_ one, that will keep its style
until it’s worn out, than half a dozen cheaper ones."

None of her customers had yet pointed out that one could buy fifteen
cheaper hats for this price, which, allowing three months for the
season, would require of each hat less than a week’s endurance. Every
one who came to her really wished to pay too much for a hat. They all
knew, of course, that the bit of fur and lace and satin she gave them
didn’t cost one-fifth of the price, but they paid the surplus for the
style--that Angélique style.

She went into the back parlour, where Sillon and Devery were draping a
collapsible form in a green tulle.

"Hello!" they both said, cheerfully.

"Wouldn’t you know this dress was for a fat woman--or should I say, a
well-rounded figure?" said Devery. "They’re all wild about green, the
big ones. I wonder why?"

"Congratulate her!" said Sillon. "Angelica, tell her how nice your name
looks out there. There she was, all Sunday afternoon, painting it and
talking about your greatness and your coming rise to fame and fortune."

Angelica sat down.

"It’s lovely," she said. "It makes me as happy as can be to see it
there, like that; but I’ve been thinking--isn’t it all queer, and
silly?--about their saying my hats are so becoming, and all that. Why,
they could get lots of things that really suited them better for almost
nothing! Do you know what I think it is? I think it’s because when I
make ’em pay so much they take more pains in putting the things on, and
that’s why they look better. They dress their hair so carefully, and try
to have everything--harmonious."

"That’s a trade secret," said Sillon. "It isn’t at all the thing to say.
Our line is, ‘Of course, if you want anything really good, you’ve got to
pay for it.’ Stick to that, Angélique!"

"Down with the rich!" said Devery. "Bleed them white and drain them
dry!"

"My father was a Socialist," said Angelica, with calm assurance. She had
no need to add, and they had no need to know, that he had been a
Socialist barber; nor was she yet advanced enough not to avoid, with
ridiculous shame, her Italian blood. "Mother says he was specially
furious at women who spent a lot on clothes."

This was another block in the edifice she was painfully erecting. She
was creating for herself a past and an environment which, without being
extravagantly false, should yet be in keeping with what she intended to
become--a foundation for her coming greatness. She often mentioned,
casually, her father and her mother and her Scotch grandparents. She
admitted that she and her mother were poor, but she suggested an
admirable and distinguished poorness. She had actually got so far as to
indicate, with rare delicacy, that her being in business was a distress
to her old-fashioned mother.

All through that day there was the same elating and intoxicating
success. All the customers who came in were satisfied, praised her, and
paid her money. Nothing went wrong.

At lunch-time Sillon made cocoa on the gas-stove in the pantry off the
back parlour, and Devery cooked spaghetti. And for the first time they
took her up into the little bedroom they had on the floor above, and
showed her some of their belongings--photographs of uncles, brothers,
cousins. Sillon had a stuffed cobra and a thrilling tale about it, and
Devery some studies she had made in her Paris days.

Then they all went into the street, to look again at the "ANGÉLIQUE";
lingering in the October brightness, the wind blowing their skirts,
their hair, making them frolicsome and gay.

"I _hate_ work!" said Devery, stretching up her thin arms, while her
purple smock whipped about her lean, straight torso in classic folds.

"What would you like to do?" asked Angelica.

"Just live--like cats, without any aim. I’d never accomplish anything.
Just as soon as you do accomplish anything, you see that it wasn’t worth
doing. What _is_?"

"Devery, you’re morbid and hypocritical," said Sillon. "You don’t mean
that. Besides, cats don’t feel like that, my child. When they’ve caught
a mouse, they feel that it was very much worth doing."

"Oh, well, so do I! I think it’s worth while to catch my meals, somehow.
Angelica, what an industrious soul you are! I don’t believe you’d enjoy
being idle."

"I’d be miserable if I didn’t think I was getting forward."

"How did we get such a paragon?" asked Sillon.

"Suppose we go out to dinner?" suggested Devery suddenly. "Early, and
then to the movies?"

"I’ll telephone to mother first," said Angelica, "to see if it will be
all right if I don’t go home."

A punctilious and Eddie-like form, and nothing more.

"Mother!" she began. "I won’t be home for dinner."

"Angie!" came the very tremulous voice of Mrs. Kennedy, always
distressed at the telephone. "Better come home as early as you can.
There’s a lady here to see you--Mrs. Russell."

Angelica was shocked, terrified.

"Something’s happened to Eddie!" she thought at first. And then came an
idea that turned her cold with fright. "They’ve found out! She knows!
She’s come to tell me what she thinks of me!"


II

Nothing of the sort, however. Mrs. Russell sat there, waiting, all
smiles and affability, for the sole purpose of inviting Angelica to
visit Buena Vista. She had had a letter from Eddie, in which he had
rather severely requested her to show all due civility to his future
wife.

"He really means it!" she had said to her husband. "I hoped he’d
forgotten. I really thought the thing had blown over. Beastly, isn’t it?
Imagine her here!"

"It doesn’t frighten me," Dr. Russell said jauntily.

"Satyr!" she said. "You can’t be trusted out of my sight!"

And both he and she were pleased and proud of his senile impudence.

Mrs. Russell had been chatting with--or perhaps to--Mrs. Kennedy for a
long time, about God knows what--the war, for one thing. Their views
were very dissimilar; Mrs. Kennedy hadn’t a trace of patriotism. She
maintained that it was a bad thing to kill so many young men, no matter
why it was done. She wasn’t interested in German perfidy. She only hoped
it would soon be over, no matter how. It wouldn’t make any difference
who won, she said.

"Would you like to live under German rule," demanded Mrs. Russell, "and
have some brutal Prussian officer swearing at you and ill-treating you?"

"I don’t believe officers would ever bother about me, American or
German," she replied. "What would they be doing, hanging around where I
was working? No, ma’am. Poor people haven’t got anything to lose. They
don’t feel the same about their country; I dare say because they don’t
own any of it. Of course, if those Germans were to come here, they’d
very likely take away your house and your jewelry and so on; but they
wouldn’t be likely to trouble _me_."

"But your daughter? She’s a very beautiful girl, you know. How would you
like some unspeakable Hun to insult her--or worse?"

Mrs. Kennedy was silent. She felt in her heart that nothing much worse
than what had happened could ever happen to her child. She simply
listened to her visitor’s accounts of outrages with decent, womanly
interest.

She was included in Mrs. Russell’s invitation to Angelica to spend a
week-end at Buena Vista, but she refused, as she was obviously intended
to do.

"Thank you kindly," she said. "I haven’t the time."

"Why don’t you go, mother?" Angelica asked her, out of curiosity, when
they were alone again. "I should think you’d like to make a visit in a
fine house like that. And it’s going to be mine some day!"

"I don’t think so," said Mrs. Kennedy. "I don’t believe the Almighty
would allow such a thing. No, Angelica, there’s many a slip ’twixt the
cup and the lip."

"Not when your hand’s steady."

Mrs. Kennedy was a little bewildered at having her time-honoured maxim
treated imaginatively.

"Even then," she said, after an instant, "some one can come behind and
give you a shove; or the Almighty can interfere."

Angelica, at the zenith of her triumph, invited guest of Mrs. Russell,
publicly acknowledged as Eddie’s betrothed, smiled.

"He won’t!" she said. "He’s on my side!"




CHAPTER ELEVEN


So behold Angelica returning to Buena Vista in this quite new rôle,
coming up from the station in a taxi, if you please. She was thinking
all the way of her last visit, of that bedraggled and desperate creature
that had been herself.

"I’ve won!" she said. "I’ve won! All alone--everything against me--and
still I’ve won!"

She stepped out, and paid the driver with perfect assurance. She wasn’t
really poor now, and she could, with perfect propriety, afford a cab now
and then.

She knew that she was late, but she was conscious of blamelessness.
There had been a difficult customer who couldn’t be left, and who,
properly handled, had bought two outrageously dear hats. She was, in
fact, very proud of being a business woman who couldn’t help being late.

She had expected that the family would be at dinner, for she couldn’t
quite believe that they would wait for her. She didn’t expect anything
more than decent tolerance; she didn’t in the least resent the trace of
condescension in Mrs. Russell’s manner. She couldn’t fool Mrs. Russell
with conservative Scottish grandparents or an old-fashioned mother. Mrs.
Russell _knew_.

There was no light in the dining-room, so she went up on to the piazza,
and looked into the library window, for there was a blaze of light
coming from there.

And there they all were, sitting about a table, playing cards.
Unconsciously, involuntarily, her eyes sought and rested upon Vincent
first of all. He sat in profile toward her, just the same as ever,
handsome, bold, with his look of vigour and zest. All that had happened
was nothing but an episode to him; hadn’t even ruffled him. She
couldn’t bear to look at him any more.

Opposite him sat the doctor; facing the window, Mrs. Russell, and, with
his back to Angelica, a strange young man in a tweed suit very much too
big for him. Wasn’t it a suit Vincent used to wear?

"Now who’s that?" she wondered.

Suddenly Mrs. Russell flung down her cards with a slap.

"Oh, you chump!" she cried. "It’s no use. You’ll never be any good!"

An aggrieved voice, which Angelica recognized at once, answered:

"Well, what of it? I never said I wanted to play, did I? You said I had
to learn, to make it four. Well, then, I can’t, and that’s all there is
to it!"

"Courtland in there, playing cards with them!" thought Angelica. "What
would Eddie say?"

The doctor got up and stretched.

"What of dinner, Marian?" he asked his wife airily.

"I’ll see," she said, and went briskly out of the room.

Angelica rang the bell, and Courtland came to admit her.

"Hello!" he said. "What do _you_ want?"

She repressed the too ready answer that was at the tip of her tongue,
and said, with dignity:

"Mrs. Russell expects me."

"Well, she’s in the kitchen," said Courtland, in conversational tone.
"She helps Annie now while----”

"All right!" said Angelica. "I’ll go down."

She had reached the dark passage at the foot of the kitchen stairs when
a hand on her shoulder arrested her.

"Angelica!" said Vincent’s voice. "What are you doing here? Go away!
I’ll send you money--I swear I will! Only go away! You won’t get
anything out of me by hounding me this way."

"I didn’t come here to get money out of you. I don’t expect anything
more from you."

He couldn’t see her face, but her voice was steady and quiet. He grew
yet more alarmed.

"What did you come here for? What do you want?"

"It’s none of your business," she said slowly.

She was struggling with a terrible fury against him--this careless young
man who was living so well without her. She longed to let herself go, to
turn on him with a torrent of abuse, to swear at him, shriek at him; but
she must not. She dared not antagonize him. He, too, had a temper, and,
if he lost it, God only knew what irreparable harm he might do her. She
had now, and always, either to propitiate him or to frighten him; by
some means to make him hold his tongue.

Vincent’s arm tightened on Angelica’s shoulder.

"You’ve got to tell me!" he said. "I’ll have no more of your damned
nonsense. What do you want here?"

She made no answer, but stood motionless in the dark.

"Tell me!" he said fiercely. "What do you expect to get here?"

Still she was silent.

"You answer me," he hissed, "or I’ll----”

She laughed.

"You’ll _what_?" she asked contemptuously. "Throw me down the stairs?
Choke me?"

He released her.

"You damnable woman!" he said. "You’ve some outrageous scheme, I know;
but you’ll get nothing out of me. Nothing! Not a penny!"

"I don’t suppose I will!" she said, half to herself, as she turned away
and went on into the kitchen.

There, on a high stool before the table, sat Mrs. Russell, wearing an
apron and, unaccountably, a little housemaid’s cap. Her great feet were
twisted about the stool, and she was bent forward intently over the
salad she was mixing. Annie was at the stove, stirring, tasting, lifting
covers, peering into the oven, and listening, with an air of complete
incredulity, to her mistress.

"My _dear_!" cried Mrs. Russell, catching sight of Angelica. "How nice!"

She had, to tell the truth, quite forgotten that she had invited her.

"I’m sorry I’m late----” Angelica began.

"It doesn’t matter. We’re late too," she answered. "I help Annie every
evening now. We haven’t any cook--only Annie and that nice little Molly,
and a woman who comes in by the day. War economy! But I really rather
like it, and Annie has taught me so much!"

She looked at Annie with an ingratiating smile--of which Annie took not
the slightest notice.

"After all," she went on, "I suppose we really ought to know how to
cook--all of us women, shouldn’t we? The men do their part, so nobly,
going off to fight and----” She stopped, suddenly bored with her
subject. "So you see!" she said inanely, smiling again.

Angelica looked about the enormous kitchen, so spotless, so brightly
lit, so marvelously equipped.

"It’s a nice place to work in," she said. "See here! Won’t you teach me?
I’d like to learn."

Annie stood looking at her with a highly displeased expression. She
didn’t understand this return of Angelica, and Mrs. Russell’s great
friendliness toward her; and no one explained anything.

"Of course we will, my dear! You ought to learn! Let’s see. What can she
do, Annie?"

"Nothing, ma’am," said Annie firmly. "It’s all done and ready to serve."

"Nonsense! It isn’t. I know it isn’t. Let’s see. My dear, I’ll show you
how to do a spinach _purée_. It’s delicious, and frightfully good for
the blood. We’re all eating spinach almost every night now. Watch me!"

Angelica was hungry and weary, but she profited to the full by this
novel lesson in her great course of preparation. She watched, she
questioned, she tried her own hand at it.

Mrs. Russell praised her.

"You’re very quick!" she said. "Now we’ll help Annie to put the dishes
on the dumb-waiter; then we’ve just half a minute to wash and brush up."

She led the way to her room, lively, cheerful, almost affectionate; and
although Angelica knew how very uncertain and shallow this good-humour
was, nevertheless it helped her.

She had decided upon a step which dismayed her. She had decided to talk
to Vincent--to reason with him, to threaten or to cajole him. He was the
one danger, the one person she had to dread. No matter how carefully she
went, he could in an instant destroy all that she had built up; he could
really ruin her. She had been trying for a long time to devise some
method for ensuring his silence, for gaining a little security. She had
begun and torn up more than one letter. Now that they were once more
under the same roof, she felt it a unique opportunity which she was too
brave to shirk. She couldn’t go on, never feeling sure, never knowing
what he would do, what he had done.

She was startled to find Courtland sitting at the dinner-table; but as
the others took him as a matter of course, she showed no surprise,
although she was not at all pleased to be seated next to him.

The doctor had an evening paper.

"The news," he said, "isn’t good--not in Eddie’s section. He’s going to
be just in the center of the line to oppose the next big drive."

"Fiddlesticks!" said his wife. "You don’t know where he is, or where the
next drive is coming. Only the _stuff_ you read in the papers!"

"I use my brains, and I put two and two together----”

"He doesn’t know himself where he is," said Vincent. "Most of the chaps
don’t. They’re like driven sheep."

"Of course they know!" said Mrs. Russell. "You don’t suppose they’re
blindfolded, do you?"

A loud and violent discussion followed, all three of them talking at
once, under cover of which Angelica addressed her neighbour.

"What are you doing up here?"

"Just what you’re doin’," replied Courtland. "Eatin’ my dinner."

She had no opportunity to say more to him, for Mrs. Russell peremptorily
ordered him to fetch the car, and, after gulping down his pudding in
sullen resentment, he left the table.

"I’ve got to take Vincent to the Country Club," she said. "He’s going to
sing ‘Sambre et Meuse’ at an entertainment there. My dear, you should
hear him. Of course we’re all supposed to be strictly neutral, and all
that, but up there, at the club, the pretense is frightfully thin. All
really decent people, you know. We have a dear little wounded Belgian
officer who’s going to speak; but I’ve heard him simply hundreds of
times, so I won’t wait. I’ll be home in half an hour. Make yourself at
home, won’t you?"

Angelica reassured her light-hearted hostess that she would be
altogether happy and comfortable until her return, and, after the
motor-car had gone, wandered back into the library, looking for a book.

But she couldn’t read. She began to contemplate her coming interview
with Vincent.

She could not trust him for an instant. She never knew when he would be
moved to tell the entire story to Eddie, or to his mother, or to any one
else. If he were attacked by one of his fits of remorse, he would be
almost certain to do so. She held him only by a threat made in a mood of
supreme passion, which she could never recapture.

Despair crept over her. This step along her stony path seemed too
difficult. She had no violent emotion to carry her forward now; no
impetus remained from her former terrific onslaughts. She had simply to
state a request--a request of the utmost importance to all her future
life; and she felt quite sure it would be refused.

Her very unpleasant reverie was broken into by the entrance of the
doctor. He came, he said, to apologize on behalf of Mrs. Russell for her
lateness. She wouldn’t be able, after all, to escape the entertainment.
He had brought Angelica a large, marvelous box of sweets, which he
offered with a sort of subdued gallantry. She accepted it carelessly,
and for a while listened to his talk.

He had quite changed his tune now. He couldn’t keep an irrepressible
jauntiness, or a sort of airy flattery, from his conversation with so
pretty a girl; but he was deferential and decorous. He and his wife were
both entirely resigned to the idea of Angelica as Eddie’s wife. If Eddie
had to be married, one woman was as good as another, and Angelica was
perhaps a little better than a possible alternative. At least they knew
her, and they had, in a way, a sort of advantage with her.

"I guess I’ll go to bed," said Angelica, who had been politely waiting
for a pause in the doctor’s war talk. "I’m tired!"

She went up to the room she had occupied before, prepared to go to bed
at once; but she found the room just as she had left it, all that long,
long time ago--bare, dismal, the bed covered with a sheet, the rugs
taken up, leaving the floor bare, the curtains gone, dark shades pulled
down.

An angry flush spread over her face. At first she believed that she saw
here a deliberate insult; but with reflection she became satisfied that
it was not intentional. It was simply another evidence of Mrs. Russell’s
magnificent indifference. She sat down in that same little chair by the
window, where she used to sit a year ago. A year ago!

She had plenty to think of, there, until Mrs. Russell came back.

Mrs. Russell at once began to blame Annie for having forgotten to
attend to the room, but in a subdued voice, because she didn’t dare to
let Annie hear this wickedly unjust censure. The maid hadn’t forgotten
to get the room ready; it hadn’t been mentioned to her.

She was summoned.

"Annie," said Mrs. Russell, as if to share the blame, "here’s Miss
Kennedy’s room not ready! I’ll help you with it."

All she really contributed was her curious ability to create an
atmosphere of bustle and cheerful confusion--the quality which had won
her so much praise for her war work. When at last the room was ready,
she had become frightfully bored with it and with Angelica, and was in a
reckless hurry to be off.

"Good night!" she cried cheerfully. "Ring, if we’ve forgotten anything!"

And she vanished, leaving Angelica alone with Annie, who was just
shaking a final pillow into its embroidered linen case. She set it
straight on the bed, and turned, grim as death.

"Well!" she said. "I never expected to see _you_ back here, that I
didn’t!"

She couldn’t resist saying that, although she knew it to be improper.
She was too deeply affronted by the presence of this creature here, and
by the necessity for waiting upon her.

Angelica wasn’t offended.

"No," she said, "I dare say you didn’t; but you’ll be still more
surprised when I tell you I’m going to marry Mr. Eddie."

"Oh, are you!" said Annie politely, with raised eyebrows.

"And coming back here to live," Angelica went on, with a rather pitiful
effort to win some sort of friendly interest.

"I sha’n’t be here long myself. I’m going to be married, too."

"That’s nice! When? Tell me about it."

"It wouldn’t interest _you_."

"Yes, it would. Is he the same one?"

"Of course he is! I’m not one to be chopping and changing. Once I’ve
given my word, I stand by it."

This, very obscurely, was intended as a reproach to Angelica, and
Angelica, though not conscious of any breach of faith in such a
connection, felt none the less guilty before the righteous Annie.

"I know," she said. "Well, I hope you’ll be happy, Annie."

"I dare say I will. It can’t be too soon for me. The way things have
changed here--I never saw the like!"

"How have they changed?" Angelica inquired.

"There’s that Courtland sitting up-stairs at the table with them, and me
expected to wait on him. Her ‘war secretary,’ she calls him. He’s no
more a secretary than I am. Secretaries write your letters for you, but
Courtland--_he_ couldn’t write letters for any one. He’s _ignorant_. And
him to be set up above me, like this! And my young man’s a sergeant
already. Why isn’t Courtland in the army, like his betters? Well!" she
added piously. "They may be exalted above me now, but the time will come
when they’ll all be cast down so far below me I can’t even so much as
see them!"

And this meant Angelica, too. She was among the black sheep, the
unworthy and the wicked, temporarily set above the righteous, only to be
hurled down and utterly destroyed. Annie bade her good night with dour
relish, in the sure and certain hope of a glorious triumph. She knew how
it would be with this Angelica!




CHAPTER TWELVE


I

"Then why _did_ you come here?" asked Vincent.

"Because your mother asked me," said Angelica.

Vincent shook his head.

"I don’t believe you," he said. "You’ve got something up your sleeve. I
know you! All your moves are calculated."

He turned away from her and began to walk up and down the piazza, where
they had encountered each other quite alone, that early Sunday morning.

"No!" he insisted. "It’s something to do with me. One of your damned
Italian schemes!"

"It’s nothing to do with you," said Angelica steadily. "Nothing at all.
I don’t bother myself about you any more."

He stopped directly in front of her and looked into her face with the
vicious, sneering laugh she had once so dreaded; but now it troubled her
not at all. She regarded him as a trained nurse might look at a
troublesome patient, perfectly self-possessed and assured in her white
linen frock and her trim hair.

It filled him with rage and hatred to see her so. He felt an
uncontrollable wish to insult her, to talk to her outrageously, to force
her to abandon this calmness, this superiority.

"You’d better bother about me!" he said. "You’d better remember that
it’s only through my pity for you that you’re here. With half a word I
could have you turned out of the house!"

She was imperturbable.

"I don’t think so," she said. "I wanted to talk to you about this,
anyway, and it might as well be now. I don’t think Eddie would believe
you, if you told him."

He laughed.

"My dearest girl, there’s a living proof!"

"No," she said, looking steadily at him. "There isn’t."

"What have you done? Murdered your baby, or sold it? That would suit
your thrifty soul better. You do love money, don’t you, Angelica, better
than an inconvenient baby!"

"What baby?" she inquired.

"My God!" he cried, staring at her. "The impudence of the hussy! So
that’s the tack! You’re going to lie out of it? Going to deny you ever
had a child?"

"And how do you know I did? You never saw it, did you? How do you know
it wasn’t just a trick to get money out of you?"

That astounded him.

"Do you mean you dared to try that game on me? You little gutter-bred
liar!" Suddenly he began to laugh. "But you didn’t get much, did you?"
he said.

Angelica smiled grimly.

"Now then!" she said. "Let’s have it out! I’ll own up that I don’t want
you to tell--that--to any one, and especially to Eddie. It would give me
a lot of trouble; but it wouldn’t spoil things. I have two good reasons
for not worrying about being found out. In the first place, I’d deny it
all, and I’m just as likely to be believed as you. You haven’t got a
name for being so awfully truthful, you know. I’d say you were making it
up out of spite, because I wouldn’t have you. And then I don’t think
you’d run the risk of telling Eddie. You’re too fond of yourself. You
know what would happen if he didn’t believe you. He’d kick you out for
telling such lies about me; and if he did believe you, he’d never
forgive you. You’d never get anything more from him. No; it wouldn’t
suit you a bit to get Eddie down on you!"

"So you think you’re going to manage me like a marionette? You think you
can make any sort of fool out of me?"

"You’ve made a fool of yourself," she said. She wanted to stop there,
but she could not resist the terrible temptation to hurt, in her turn,
this man who had hurt her so brutally. She didn’t care if it were vulgar
or if it were imprudent; she wanted only to hurt. "You made a regular
fool of yourself," she went on. "You acted like a monkey--going down on
your knees to me and raving the way you did. Do you remember?"

She was smiling a little--the subtle and cruel shadow of a smile.

"Don’t you think you were a fool? So weak--first in one of your childish
rages, and then crying and whining about your sins? And then
beginning----”

"Never mind the means I used," he said. "I got what I wanted. I knew how
to get you, and I knew how to get rid of you when I was tired of you."

No! It was too unequal a battle; she suffered too much. Every memory of
that dead love was too bitter, too shameful, too full of a strange,
heart-rending pain. He had all the advantage; she couldn’t wound him as
he could wound her. She was mortally stricken; but she wouldn’t give up.

"You’ll pay for all this!" she said. "I’ll be the mistress here, and if
you don’t act as I please, out you’ll go! I’ll see that you’re kept in
order. You won’t be able to fool Eddie when I’m here!"

He cursed her savagely.

"Go on!" she said, smiling. "I like it! I’m glad I’ve made you feel like
this."

Vincent pulled himself up with a strong effort.

"Well," he said, "with all your melodramatic threats of revenge, you’ll
never be able to do me much harm--not a hundredth part of the harm I’ve
done you. You’re ruined, no good!"

"Bah!" she cried. "You and your talk about ruining me! _Am_ I ruined? Do
I _look_ any worse? Am I worse in any way at all?"

"Yes!" he said. "You are, and you know it."

He gave her one bright, fierce, scornful look, and, vaulting over the
piazza railing, walked off across the lawn.

Angelica sank back in her chair.

"Oh, Lord!" she murmured, with a sob. "That was so awful! Oh, I do wish
I could go home now, without having to see him again--ever!"

She got up and went irresolutely to the door. What was she to do with
herself to forget, to overcome her terrible emotion? She knew she
needn’t expect to see either Mrs. Russell or the doctor before
lunch-time on Sunday, and it was now only ten o’clock. She didn’t know
what to do; she wanted only to be active and to be for a little time
alone.

She was not at all fond of walking as a pastime, but she set out
resolutely enough now, along the quiet country road, trying to fix her
thoughts upon Sillon and Devery and all that frank and bright existence,
and to forget this world, this house with its intolerable memories, this
man, whose very existence was an outrage to her.

"I shouldn’t have come!" she told herself. "I was a fool! I guess it
can’t be done. I guess you can’t--get over a--thing like that."

And in spite of herself came the unwelcome and terrible thought:

"How will it be, then, when you are married to Eddie and living in that
house and seeing Vincent every day?"

She tried to escape from it. She walked faster, farther; but the walk
did her no good. There was nothing in the country landscape to divert
her thoughts, nothing to interest her. She had the purposeful gait of
the city dweller; she wanted to get somewhere, and she wanted to be
startled into attention with fascinating shop-windows, blazing signs,
things and people always passing her. The quiet, all about, made the
sound of her own firm step on the macadam road annoyingly loud and
regular. The bright, clear sky overhead, the leaves somberly brilliant
in their glorious death, filled her with impatience and loneliness. She
turned back.

And the first living creature she saw on the road was Vincent, coming to
meet her.

She didn’t falter. They went on, nearer and nearer to each other,
steadily, rapidly; but her heart began to beat with suffocating
violence.

"Maybe he’ll try to kill me," she thought. "It’s so lonely here--and he
hates me so! Well, I guess that’s the best thing that could happen to
me!"

But as he drew near, he held out his hand.

"Angelica!" he cried. "Oh, Angelica, _why_ did I speak that way to you?
When I’ve been longing and longing----”

"Better stop!" she said. "I’d rather have you talk that way than any
other."

He had turned and was walking by her side.

"Don’t you see?" he said. "All this bitterness and wrangling--it’s all
part of the same thing--part of our love for each other. It’s the
exasperation, the rage, of frustration. When we’re apart we suffer so,
and in our suffering we blindly try to hurt each other."

"Do you mean to say you’re trying to pretend that we _love_ each other?"
she cried.

"Yes," he said. "We do. We can’t stop. We’re mates. We complete each
other. We’re made for each other. Even when I’m hating you so that I
could wring your neck, I know in my soul it’s only a phase of love."

"Well," she said, "it’s not, with me."

But she was trembling with a mysterious and unfathomable emotion--a
wicked and irresistible feeling of kinship with this man. Not love, not
tenderness, not any feeling that she could name; only this conviction
that they were bound up together, that they could never be strangers,
that it was against nature that they should part.

"Marry Eddie, if you like," he went on. "I don’t care. You’re mine. You
can be his wife; it won’t matter. You won’t love him. You’ll love _me_.
I’ll be your lover!"

Her face flamed.

"Oh!" she cried. "Oh! You’re the wickedest man that ever lived!"

"I’m not wicked!" he protested with earnestness. "The wickedness lies in
your going to Eddie after you’ve loved me--in your faithlessness."

"My faithlessness!" she cried.

"It was you who left me," he reminded her.

She was amazed at this very characteristic turn which he had given to
their talk. That he should pose as the injured one! But her pride
forbade her to mention her wrongs.

"It’s no use talking," she said. "It’s all over now. The less we see of
each other, the better satisfied I’ll be."

They had reached the gates of Buena Vista, and Vincent appeared
unwilling to be seen with Angelica.

"I’m going farther," he said. "But, Angelica, I won’t let you go!"


II

The visit was altogether a disappointment. Angelica had imagined that it
would be a sort of triumph for her, that she could at least a little
exult over these "rich people"; but, after all, it was nothing but an
obvious condescension on their part. She hadn’t conquered them; they had
accepted her voluntarily--not reluctantly, but rather graciously.

It was a tiresome day. Mrs. Russell’s cordiality had evaporated
overnight, and she was bored and yawning. She lay in a deck chair on
the piazza, rustling through the Sunday papers, and talking to Angelica
now and then with outrageously forced politeness. She had an air which
Angelica knew of old; when one of her fits of ennui came on her, she all
but pushed her bewildered guests out of the door.

But Angelica stayed until after supper. That was what she had planned to
do, and what she was determined to do. She too sat on the piazza, with a
Sunday paper, concealing her sullenness.

There wasn’t any supper, properly speaking. Annie was out, and Mrs.
Russell said that their new custom was to help themselves from the
ice-chest--a plan which might have been jolly if the people had been a
little less hostile. They stood about in the immaculate kitchen with
plates in their hands, Mrs. Russell yawning, the doctor subdued,
Angelica severe, and Courtland embarrassed and aggrieved. Vincent wasn’t
there. There was beer and cold chicken and ham and salad and tarts.

"And coffee if you want to make it," Mrs. Russell said; but no one did.

After this, Angelica took her leave. Courtland was suddenly deprived of
his secretarial dignity and ordered peremptorily to drive her to the
station, which he did in complete silence. He never ceased to resent
this seesawing, by which he was one moment the promising young man being
trained as a secretary and treated with immense, if not maternal,
indulgence, and the next minute was a servant and a rather rudely
treated one. He endured it with wonder and disgust.

Angelica was able now to gratify a long-cherished desire--she was
traveling in the style which she had so much admired in suburban ladies.
It was, of course, out of the question to expect Courtland to help her
on the train. Nothing in the world could have induced him to do so; but
at least she was able to alight from a motor, to buy three or four
magazines and a box of sweets, and enter the train, thus burdened, with
the proper air. She sat down near a window and opened a magazine.

A hand covered the page.

"Angie!" said a voice, and she looked up into Vincent’s laughing face.

She couldn’t repress a smile herself--a sudden throb of joy; that
exquisite feeling of comradeship again.

"Are you glad to see me?" he asked.

"No. Why should I be?"

"You can spare this one little evening for me," he said, "no matter what
wonderfully upright sort of future you’re planning. It won’t hurt any
one. I’ll be irreproachable. I won’t make any demands, any requests. I
won’t evoke old memories. Before we say good-by, let me have a few hours
with the old Angelica--my beloved, reckless, adorable Angelica. Just to
make a memory!"

"No; we better not!" she said.

It might well, she thought, make a memory which would last far, far too
long.

"Why not, Angelica?"

"I don’t want to, Vincent, that’s all."

He didn’t urge her; he sat quietly beside her, suddenly dejected. The
train ran on past dark woods, wide fields, lighted houses; stopped at
lively little stations with their lines of motors--that world of
bourgeois smartness which Angelica so admired. It turned her thoughts
again to Eddie, and to all that she would gain through Eddie. _She_
would be coming home to one of these little stations, met by her own
motor, to be whirled off to her own lovely home, with servants to wait
on her, with dignity, security, peace!

And a sudden disarming pity for Vincent rushed over her--poor Vincent
who had nothing to give. She glanced cautiously at his face, gloomy,
perplexed, his eyes clouded with a sort of hungry dissatisfaction. He
couldn’t help but look bold all the time, but even that boldness was
pitiful to her who knew his weakness, his faults, his vices, his
follies. She had never felt so sorry for any one else.

"Walk home with me, if you like," she said.

They came out into the bewildering brilliance of Forty-Second Street
side by side, and began walking east, slowly, in that astonishing
hurly-burly of crowds, of glittering signs winking, flashing, pouring
out into the night sky a flood of radiance, of hurrying taxis, immense
motor-cars, trolleys, strings of fiercely lighted little shops, the
windows filled with inane and shamelessly overpriced trinkets and
souvenirs; noise, blinding light, crowds and crowds of people.

"Let’s turn down Madison Avenue," suggested Vincent.

"That’s out of my way."

"But you’re in no hurry. Please!"

She consented; she had no particular reason for not doing so. He took
her arm as they turned into the darker, quieter street, and went on with
her so, like a young lover, his head turned toward her, listening
eagerly, watching her face.

"Now tell me about it," he said. "Tell me what it is that’s made you
change so."

She didn’t answer.

"It was you, and all the dreadful pain you caused me," she thought, but
without bitterness; with only immeasurable sadness and regret that it
should have been so.

"I’ve been working with two very nice girls," she said aloud. "They’ve
helped me, and I’ve learned a lot from them."

He asked her a great many questions. He was really interested in it all,
and in the effect of this commercial adventure upon her crude soul. It
was the first time any one had shown a real interest in her heart and
her mind. He didn’t care so much about what she _did_, as what she
_felt_. She could not help talking freely, with a sense of great relief.
All the observation of her shrewd and intelligent mind, so friendless
and so little understood, came to her lips now--not the naïve egoism of
a young girl in love, but the wit, the vigour, the soundness of a woman
of character.

They turned into Fifth Avenue at Twenty-Third Street, and went on
down-town, for Angelica had promised to show Vincent her millinery shop.

"There!" she said with pride.

They stood in the silent and deserted square, looking at the house, at
the peacock, at the windows where in the light of the street-lamp the
purple letters of "Angélique" might be deciphered.

A clock struck eleven.

"I’ll have to hurry home," said Angelica. "Mother’ll worry."

She was reluctant, for she had been happy in her fool’s paradise. Of
course it couldn’t last, this friendly communion with the man she found
above all other people in the world supremely interesting, supremely
attractive. She knew all about him, she didn’t trust him; but it was
something just to be with him, so happily, for this one last time.

All the old magic came flowing back into her heart, there in the tiny
park, with the dead leaves blowing down the paths, and a sharp white
moon to be seen now and then as the wispy clouds drew across it. That
yearning for his sympathy, for his love, positively tormented her. She
longed and longed to draw near to him, to feel his arm about her.

As always, his instinct warned him of his moment. His hold on her arm
tightened.

"Don’t go!" he said. "Let’s have just this hour! Angelica, imagine--if
we had a little room here, some little place all to ourselves! And I’d
wait at home for you, and write and dream about you, and long for you
all day, while you sat there in your shop, bending your dear, dark head
over your work. You’d work for me, until I grew famous--and then I’d
make a queen--an empress of you, my beloved woman!"

"Don’t begin that!" she entreated. "We’ve had such a nice time!"

"But think of it! Think of sitting together in the dark, in our poor
little room, our arms about each other, weary, harassed, finding our joy
and consolation only in those hours together--living just for that! Oh,
Angelica! Angelica! Hasn’t this long, weary parting been just an
interlude? Can’t we begin again? Take me back! Forgive me and love me
and make me over. Make me what you wish. Come back to me! Come back to
me! I need you so terribly!"

"Don’t!" she begged again, profoundly troubled. "I don’t know how to
tell you--how to make you see how useless it is. I can’t--I don’t feel
as I used to. All that is dead. I’ll never care that way for any one
again."

"For me you can!"

She shook her head dumbly.

"Vincent, you’ve done me enough harm. For God’s sake, let me alone! Now,
just when I’m struggling up out of the mud, you come and try to pull me
down. Right here, before this very house----”

She stopped, unable to explain, even to suggest to him all that Fine
Feathers meant to her, how it was her honour, her dignity, friendship,
self-respect, ambition.

"You see how I’ve changed," she said, "and how I’ve improved. Why don’t
you try to help me?"

"Changed?" he said, stooping to look into her face. "Not a bit of it,
Angelica! You’re nothing but my Angelica, my beloved girl, the mother of
my child!"

"Oh, stop!" she cried. "Oh, it’s too horrible!"

"It’s too horrible that you should repudiate me. Angelica, let us take
back our child and start again, a decent, honest life. You talk of
improving yourself; why don’t you think of improving me--of helping your
poor little child? Let’s help each other!"

"You wouldn’t do it! You know you wouldn’t!" she cried. The tears were
rolling down her cheeks unnoticed. "You’ve never even seen the poor
little thing, or asked about him."

"But I’ve thought of him! I’ve been haunted by that little son--yours
and mine. Oh, Angelica, don’t, don’t for God’s sake, turn away from me!
Polly will set me free, and I’ll marry you and we will have our child
again."

She felt as if she were sinking in a whirlpool. An intolerable pity for
this man confused her, overwhelmed her.

Her troubled glance, leaving his beloved face, fell upon the ridiculous
peacock with its jaunty little paper hat--fit image for her nightmare;
and a little trickle of cold, sane daylight began to filter into her
darkened and suffering mind.

"Angelica! Let us begin again, you and I and our little son----”

"No!" she cried in a ringing voice. "No!"

His face fell. He looked at her, startled.

"No!" she said again. "I’d never believe you--not a word you said. I
won’t forget! I’ll _never_ forget, and I’ll never forgive what you’ve
done. You’re a liar! You’re a beast! I hate you!"




CHAPTER THIRTEEN


I

Angelica was working in the back parlour the next afternoon with Sillon
when Devery brought her in a letter. She smiled ironically and tucked it
into her blouse, for she knew the writing.

"I wonder how he’ll be this time!" she reflected. "You can never tell.
Maybe in an awful rage, or sad, or making love. Well, it doesn’t matter
to me now. I’ve finished with him! But I was really nearly gone last
night."

She had stopped short in her work and sat looking vacantly before her.

"I don’t know why I’m such a fool about that man. I don’t know what it
is about him!"


II

She didn’t trouble to open his letter until she was ready to go home.
Then, alone for a minute, she pulled it out and opened it, half sadly.

"No!" she cried suddenly. "No! I don’t believe it."

"What is it?" Devery called out from the next room.

"Nothing!" said Angelica, with stiff lips.

She hid the letter in her blouse in terror at the idea of its being
seen. Then she was forced to bring it out again, to read it, to make
sure.

     Wanton, without a heart! You thing from the gutter, willing to give
     your body to any man, while you keep your cold and poisonous heart
     to yourself, for your own sordid aims! I swear to you I will never
     let you destroy Eddie as you have me. It would be an outrage to
     call you sister, to permit you to bear our name. I would rather
     die. And I shall die. I have enlisted in the army. I shall soon be
     sent to France, and I shall find Eddie there and tell him your
     little history. Then I shall die. Nothing on earth can stop me. It
     will be the supreme moment of my life when I tell Eddie, when I see
     his face, and know that your shameless ends are frustrated--when I
     know that you are really ruined.

"He won’t do it!" she tried to reassure herself. "He’s always making
threats. He wouldn’t really do anything that might harm himself."

But she knew that Vincent didn’t always act from self-interest. His
passions were very apt to overwhelm him, and malice was one of the
strongest of his passions. He would enjoy exquisitely telling the
wretched tale to Eddie.

For three months she didn’t draw a free breath. She tried to dismiss her
terror from her mind. She said to herself, resolutely: "Don’t borrow
trouble!" "Don’t worry about what may never happen!" "Don’t cross your
bridges before you come to them," and all sorts of tags from her
mother’s store. She faced Devery and Sillon every morning with the same
hardy good-humour. She was dutiful and severe at home, as had become her
custom, and to no living soul did she give the smallest hint of what she
was enduring.

Every time a letter came from Eddie, or if a mail were missed, she
expected the blow to fall, all her laboriously made plans to be
destroyed, her pride and dignity trampled underfoot, all her life
wrecked. She was utterly in the dark. She had no idea what was going on,
or what had already happened, and she could take no steps to gain
information. She could do nothing but wait.

Then came another letter from Vincent:

     I am home on leave. That means that we shall very soon be going
     over. Good-by, Angelica! I have a hard, bitterly hard task before
     me. I must hurt Eddie and I must hurt you. As for me, there is
     nothing before me but death. Deserted and ruined as I am, I long
     for death. Your love was all that pleased me in life. With that
     gone, there is nothing but a waste, bleak beyond endurance. I shall
     only beg Eddie to forgive my vile treachery, as I beg you to
     forgive my sins against you. Forget your presumptuous and wicked
     dream of marrying that good man. That can never be. He will forgive
     you, as he will forgive me, but he will never forget.

     Good-by, Angelica. I give you to God!

                                                               VINCENT.

Asleep and awake that picture haunted her--a vision of Eddie,
mud-stained, horribly pale, sitting on a box, with a candle flickering
on the ground beside him, in a dugout with mud walls and great puddles
of filthy water--the sort of thing she had seen in the cinema, ghastly,
desolate, with an incessant play of rockets and bursting shells
overhead; and Vincent standing before him in one of his fine attitudes,
so handsome, so strong, so noble, telling him. She knew how he would
dwell upon the details, with what colour he would describe her caresses,
her kisses, heightening the temptation just as he would heighten his
remorse.

It didn’t occur to her that Vincent might encounter some obstacles to a
prompt meeting with his brother, with all the different services and all
the vast battlefield to be considered. She fancied him being at once
directed to Eddie’s dugout like a stranger in a village.

She lived in a long nightmare. She didn’t know how the blow would
fall--whether she would come home to find a letter from Eddie, casting
her off; whether Mrs. Russell would be there to tell her; whether she
would have a letter from some stranger, a friend of Eddie’s--a lawyer,
perhaps. But what she most feared was the idea of coming to Fine
Feathers some morning and seeing Sillon and Devery suddenly turned
hostile. She felt that she could not bear that. It would do for her.

But weeks went by, and nothing at all happened. One day, while she was
in the back parlour, she heard Mrs. Russell’s voice in the front room;
but the very tone of it reassured her. She wanted to buy a hat, and she
wanted Angelica to let her have it cheap; so she was extraordinarily
agreeable. She had, moreover, some sort of idea that it would help
Angelica in the eyes of her partners to be seen in friendly converse
with a lady like herself.

"I wish you’d come and see me!" she said. "I’m so lonely! They’ve all
gone--Vincent, you know, and now poor Courtland’s been drafted. Dear me!
It does seem as if they ought to be able to make up a big enough army
out of those who wanted to fight, without dragging in the unwilling
ones. Poor Courtland will make a very bad soldier; he hates it so. He’s
too independent. Vincent was really marvelous. If you could have seen
him in his uniform! And he told me to be sure, if I saw you, to tell you
not to forget him. He even went to Polly and begged her to be reconciled
to him before he left, perhaps never to return. I went to see her, too,
to see if I could influence her; but what do you think? She’s adopted a
baby, and she’s wrapped up in it. She says it fills her life, and she
doesn’t want any one else. She’s very hard on Vincent. Those frightfully
maternal women always are dreadfully hard on men, don’t you think? I’m
not surprised at her adopting a child; she was so absorbed in the one
she lost. I couldn’t do a thing with her. She said she had done with
Vincent. Poor boy! She’s narrow--provincial. Awfully selfish, don’t you
think?"

"I don’t know," said Angelica. "I suppose she can’t help how she feels."

"Well, I thought it was horrible to see her there, so happy with that
baby, and so callous about her husband. Not even her own baby--some
little waif she’s picked up. It’s a wretched, puny little thing, too;
she has to give it the most unceasing care. I shouldn’t be surprised to
hear any day that she’s lost it. Oh, my dear! What’s that heavenly mass
of purple?"

"That’s a negligée I’m making," said Devery, thus addressed.

"Could I possibly wear purple?" inquired Mrs. Russell earnestly. "Do
please let me see it! Oh, how _marvelous_! Could I _possibly_ slip it
on?

"Am I _hideous_?" she asked Angelica anxiously, when she had got the
purple garment on and stood before the long mirror.

"It’s not quite your style," said Angelica, with great seriousness. "I
think--but Miss Devery will give you suggestions."

"A dark green," said Devery, "with dull, blackish blue overtones--not a
floating thing like this, Mrs. Russell. You’re slender enough to stand a
straight, narrow garment. Not exactly a negligée; I never advise them,
there’s so little use in them; but what I call a boudoir gown."

"How much would it cost?" asked Mrs. Russell.

"One hundred dollars," said Devery.

Mrs. Russell looked at her, then at Angelica. They both had their
professional manners, polite, deeply interested, but firm. There was no
mercy to be had from them. She ordered the gown; then she bought a
"sports hat" of Angelica for a staggering sum, and prepared to take her
leave.

But now Miss Sillon came in, pleasant and businesslike.

"I’d be very pleased to make you a ten per cent discount, madam," she
said; "or for any one personally introduced by our Miss Kennedy."

"Oh, Sillon!" said Angelica, when she had gone. "Wasn’t that nice of
you? You can’t imagine how anything like that pleases her."

"Angélique, my child, we’d do more than that for you," said Sillon.


III

"Telephone, Mlle. Angélique!" cried Devery.

"Would you mind asking who? I’ve just got this thing pinned."

"It’s Mrs. Geraldine," Devery called. "Can’t you come?"

Angelica’s heart stood still.

"_This_ is it!" she thought. "Now it’s come!"

She went with leaden feet to the telephone in the back room, and sat
down before it. She stared at the instrument for an instant in horror.
What was it about to reveal?

She took up the receiver.

"Yes!" she said. "Is this you, Mrs. Geraldine?"

"Can you come to see me?" said that well-known voice. "There’s
something----”

"_Why?_" she cried. "What is it? Is anything wrong?"

"The baby’s quite well; but there’s a piece of news you ought to know."

"Oh!" she gasped. "Oh, tell me! What?"

"Don’t lose your head, Angelica; but come when you can. I’ll be in all
the afternoon. And don’t worry. It’s only that I think you ought to know
before all the others."

She didn’t wait to hear the rest. She left the telephone and turned to
her friends a distracted and blanched face.

"I’ve got to go!" she said.

"Is anything wrong?" asked Sillon kindly, alarmed by her look.

"Yes! I’ve got to go!"

"Can’t I go with you?"

"No, no, no!"

Angelica was pinning on her hat, without even a glance in the mirror,
and was starting out when Devery stopped her.

"Your bag!" she said. "Or are you coming back to-day?"

"Never!" she cried. "Never!"

They stood together watching her go.

"Poor kid!" said Devery. "It must be something _very_ wrong!"

Angelica was out of sight, hurrying along the street, trembling with
eagerness to embrace this anguish, to get it over, to be done with her
torment.

She rang Polly’s bell, and Polly herself admitted her visitor. She
looked ill and haggard, with eyes heavy and dull, and reddened with
sleeplessness--or was it with tears?

"Come in," she said pleasantly. "Sit down, Angelica. Will you have a cup
of tea?"

"Oh, _no_!" she cried. "Hurry up and tell me! They all know it? Eddie’s
written! Oh, Mrs. Geraldine, I knew right away! Eddie’s written to say
that Vincent’s told him. Oh, my God! He said he would, and he has!
That’s what he went for. Oh, my God! All my life ruined! Oh, Mrs.
Geraldine!"

"My dear, try to calm yourself," said Polly. "There--sit down. You’re
making yourself ill. Vincent hasn’t told any one. He never will,
Angelica."

"He said he would!"

"He never will. He’s dead."

Her voice broke in a faint sob.

"_Dead?_" cried Angelica. "Vincent? In the war?"

"The transport he was on, struck a mine."

"Then he never got there? He never told Eddie?"

"No."

"Oh, Mrs. Geraldine!" she cried. "Then I’m _safe_!"

Polly turned away.

"Don’t you feel _sorry_?" she asked. "He was very young to die."

Angelica shook her head.

"No, I can’t," she said; "not just now. I can’t feel anything but
glad."


IV

She stopped on her way home to tell Sillon and Devery that "it was all
right." She let them know, modestly, that there was a certain person now
in France in whom she was profoundly interested, and that she had feared
some bad news in regard to him. Then she went to a quiet little
restaurant and ate a delicious little dinner all alone, and in the
chilly, cloudy evening walked home--a long walk.

She was enjoying a feeling of exquisite and complete triumph. She had
won! She was safe now, her troubles over. Certainly God had helped her.
She was young, beautiful, beloved; she was about to be rich. She had
made a gallant fight against great odds, and she had conquered.

She greeted her mother with unusual affection and was willing to talk
with her for quite a time, about her business, about the shortcomings of
the tenants, about everything in the world except what had happened.
That she didn’t mention.

She began slowly to undress while her mother was still in the kitchen,
ironing a collar for her to wear the next day. She looked at herself in
the mirror, in her dainty camisole--a beautiful woman, with her delicate
bare arms, her slender shoulders, her curious, glowing black eyes in her
pale and lovely face----

And suddenly, almost as if she saw it in the glass beside her own,
another face, fierce, hawk-like, rigid and white, with bright hair
spread out and floating as if in the sea. Her dead lover!




CHAPTER FOURTEEN


I

The parlour now rejoiced in a new and pretty little "set," put in there
only the week before in order to receive the visits of Eddie. On one of
the chairs sat Mrs. Kennedy, dressed in silk, her hair skilfully fluffed
by her daughter, her hands manicured, her feet in soft new boots. She
was well aware that she had never looked so common, so perfectly the
janitress and scrubwoman. Her strained, haggard face, her faded eyes,
her blunted and withered hands belied her fine attire. They could have
belonged only to a woman who had worked brutally and hopelessly. She was
years younger than Mrs. Russell, but she might have passed for her
mother.

Her patient hands were folded in her silken lap; she had nothing to do,
and very little to think about. The blasphemous triumph was
accomplished; she was about to see Sin crowned and rewarded, Innocence
betrayed and abandoned--in other words, Angelica married to Eddie. She
was disgusted with life, thoroughly disappointed with her God. She took
no pleasure in these preparations, or in any of the comforts and
enjoyments before her. Nothing sustained her but a vague sort of hope
that her just God would retrieve Himself by stopping this wedding in
some way--with thunderbolts, or the flaming swords of archangels. And
she was well aware that one couldn’t really count upon anything of that
sort.

Out in the kitchen she could hear the servant--she, the charwoman,
servant of servants, sitting in the parlour while another woman drudged
for her! In half an hour an automobile was coming to take them to the
church, and then they were going off to Buena Vista, going to leave all
this poverty and humiliation behind forever. She had been given to
understand that she wasn’t to _live_ with her child, only to visit until
a suitable home could be found for her. She was to have an apartment and
a servant all of her own; she was to furnish the place as she wished,
and she was to be provided with a new wardrobe.

"And start a new life," Angelica told her.

"I’ll need to!" said Mrs. Kennedy. "This one is about done."

And although a great deal of this was paid for by Angie herself, out of
the money she had saved, her mother had never expressed gratitude. She
didn’t feel any. She had never at any moment of her life been so utterly
dissatisfied.

She glanced at the new clock.

"Angie!" she called. "What are you doing?"

"Dressing!" called back a gay, a too gay voice.

"He’ll be here in half an hour."

"I’ll be ready!"


II

She was standing before the mirror in the bedroom, adjusting her hat,
very delicately touching her hair under its net, tilting her head from
side to side, frowning thoughtfully, trying to foresee the effect she
would produce upon Sillon and Devery, Mrs. Russell and Polly, who would
be in the church. She pictured herself and Eddie walking up the
aisle--Eddie still in uniform, tall, severe, impressive, and beside him
his beautiful young bride. She was wearing a plain dark brown broadcloth
suit, a big black hat, and a magnificent set of silver fox furs Eddie
had given her. She looked like a princess. They couldn’t, any of them,
find a flaw in her--in her appearance or in her bearing. None of those
born ladies could approach her. She looked what she was determined
actually to be, the equal of any one of them. There was a position ready
for her, and she was competent to fill it.

Eddie had been so delighted with the change in her. She hadn’t seen much
of him since his return at the end of the war, but all his hours with
her had been a perpetual service of praise. He had hurried to
her his first free minute; he had wanted to give her anything,
everything--extravagantly and ridiculously. He had been tactful and
kindly with the rather contemptuous Mrs. Kennedy. He had been to see
Devery and Sillon, and had won their hearts. He had been quite perfect.

And all these thoughts were merely flitting across her mind like birds
flying above a frozen pond. Under the ice were horrors beyond naming.
She did her utmost to ignore them, to think of those things as dead and
buried and forever gone from her world; but she could not.

All that night she had been dreaming of her drowned lover, floating,
horribly, in the sea; and with him, directly beside him, her
baby--_their_ baby--its little body extended like his, its tiny white
face upturned. And she and Eddie sat on the deck of a ship, she facing
these two corpses which came smoothly along behind them, and she was
using all her wit, all her charm, to keep Eddie from turning his head
and seeing them.

The dream haunted her and mingled with her wretched thoughts. For now
that she was within a stone’s throw of her goal, now that the cup was in
her hand, to be raised to her lips, she was filled with a desperate
impatience, a terrible fever of haste and fear. Her hands were burning,
her knees weak and trembling.

"Oh, just this one more hour!" she murmured. "If only, only, _only_
nothing will happen!"

She looked past the moment, to the haven of happy years beyond, as a man
sailing a perilous channel might look ahead to the wide and quiet sea
beyond.

"Something will happen!" she told herself. "At the last minute some one
will tell him--scream it out in the church--stop the wedding. Oh, God!
Just help me now! Let me get safely married to Eddie, and I’ll try my
best to be good!"

She was conscious of being a little too pallid, too worn, and she rubbed
on her smooth cheeks a little rouge. It looked horrible, and she wiped
it off frantically.

"No! It must be my eyes that look so queer. I wonder if Eddie’ll notice,
and think I look queer! It might make him suspicious."

She forced herself to smile.

"Of course I’m nervous," she said. "Every one is. It’s nothing--nothing
at all!"

She suppressed a scream when the door-bell rang. She listened, behind
her half-closed door, until she heard Eddie’s voice talking quite in his
usual tone to her mother. No one called her. Nothing had happened.

She stood still, in a sort of daze, getting no further forward in her
dressing, until her mother entered the room.

"He’s going to take me down and put me in the auto," said Mrs. Kennedy.
"Then he’s coming back after you. You’d better hurry. It’s late, and I
don’t see any use for you to be keeping all those people waiting. That’s
not a very good way to begin."

"All right!" said her daughter hurriedly. "Go on, mother!"

She set to work in haste to add the finishing touches to her dress,
fastening the little bar pin with diamonds given her by Mrs. Russell,
drawing on her white kid gloves.

She heard him coming. She heard him stop at the kitchen door, and tell
the woman working in the kitchen that she might go. Then he came and
knocked at her door.

"Ready, Angelica?" he called out.

She gave one glance in the mirror; then she opened the door with a
forced, polite smile. There stood the poor soldier who wished to give
her all he had--poor, ardent Eddie, longing so to take her back to his
beloved home, and give it into her keeping. He stood in the doorway of
her little room, looking at her, and he too was smiling--a smile as
strained, as artificial as her own.

"Angelica!" he said softly.

He had grown quite pallid, as he did when deeply moved, and his hands
clenched and unclenched nervously. His face, his expression, had
changed. He was struggling his utmost to look, and to be, tender and
respectful; but his heart was beating with an emotion neither tender nor
respectful. He wiped his damp forehead, and came a step nearer, always
smiling, but with eyes strangely brilliant and fixed.

"No!" said Angelica sharply. She knew how he felt--she knew too well how
he felt. It sickened and shamed her.

"My darling girl!" said Eddie. "_My_ Angelica!"

"Don’t!" she said. "_Don’t_ say that! I’m not!"

"But you will be, very soon! I----”

"We ought to go, Eddie. It’s late!"

"Then kiss me, just once!"

She shook her head with a ghastly affectation of coquetry.

"No," she said. "You’ll have to wait!"

"Just as you like, Angelica," said the poor fellow. "You know, don’t
you, dear girl, that my chief wish in life is to make you happy? I
wouldn’t for----”

"Then do come on, or I’ll think you don’t want to marry me at all!"

He turned instantly, and she followed him--just to the door of her room;
but no farther. He looked back.

"Aren’t you ready?" he asked.

"Eddie!" she cried in a high, dreadful voice. "Eddie! _I can’t do it!_"

"Can’t do what?" he asked, startled.

"I can’t do it! I can’t marry you! Not unless I tell you!"

He stared at her for an instant, his quick and clear mind at work upon
this.

"What is there to tell me?" he asked. "Let’s have it!" He was alert and
suspicious now. "Come on! Let’s have it!" he repeated.

"Eddie!" she began, but a great horror at her own folly assailed her.

She felt impelled toward this abyss, while she struggled madly to turn
aside, aghast at the destruction before her. Perhaps even now it wasn’t
too late; perhaps she could disarm the suspicion that she had aroused,
could stop, and not tell him any more.

Thank God, it wasn’t too late! She _hadn’t_ told him. She felt like a
person cutting his own throat--the knife had only pricked--he is still
alive, and in a mad exultation of thankfulness.

She smiled.

"I--I got engaged to another fellow," she said; "but it’s all over now."

"When? Who was it?"

"Last year."

"Who was it, I say?"

"He was--a--a factory superintendent," said Angelica. "But it’s all over
now. I’m awfully, awfully sorry, Eddie."

"You mean you--engaged yourself to this fellow while I was in France?
After you’d promised to marry me?"

"I know it was--wrong; but I hope you’ll forgive me, Eddie!"

"Yes," he said, "I forgive you, Angelica; but oh, how _could_ you? I’m
so disappointed in you! It was so dishonourable! It was--low."

"I know! I know! I know!" she cried, with an uncontrollable impatience.
"But--forgive me and forget all about it. I’m so sorry. What more can I
say?"

"Did he--did you let him--kiss you?"

"Yes!" she murmured.

"Angelica!"

"Oh, but I’m _sorry_!" she cried desperately.

Eddie stood looking at the floor for an instant; then, with fierce
suddenness, he caught her by the arm and pulled her forward, so that he
could look into her face.

"Look here!" he shouted. "How far did this thing go?"

"It was nothing!" she cried.

"You said he kissed you. You said you were engaged to him. Some coarse,
common brute of a workman mauling you--I know those people--I know their
love-making. God, Angelica! You make me _sick_! You’ve no fineness,
no--decency!" he cried.

He searched her face with eyes that terrified her.

"I don’t believe you," he said suddenly.

"But, Eddie----” she stammered.

"I don’t believe you!" he said again. "You’re lying. This fellow was
your lover!"

"Oh, don’t!" she cried.

"Answer me! Tell me the truth!"

"No! I did! I did tell you the truth. There was nothing--like that."

"Swear it! Say, ‘I swear to God I was absolutely faithful to you all the
time you were away.’"

His eyes never left her face; but she repeated, firmly:

"I swear to God I was absolutely faithful to you all the time you were
away."

He looked puzzled. He sat down heavily in a chair and covered his eyes
with his hand.

"I’m sorry," he said. "I didn’t mean to be so rough. Only--it’s a
terrible disappointment to me, Angelica. I never imagined such a thing.
I almost wish you hadn’t told me. I keep seeing you and some hulking
fellow in overalls----”

She was sobbing bitterly, standing before him like a forlorn and
penitent child.

"Don’t cry!" he said more kindly. "Don’t cry, my dear. I’ll try to
forget it. I’ll try!"

"Will it--not make any difference?" she sobbed.

"I’ll try not to let it. Only, Angelica--it was often so hard--over
there--not to--so hard to be true to you--not even to think of any one
else; and when I think of it, and how I hated myself, even for my
thoughts--I feel like a _fool_. I don’t believe you’d have cared _what_
I did. You don’t feel as I do. You don’t value loyalty as I do."

She seized this opening.

"No!" she cried. "I shouldn’t have cared, one bit, whatever you did, if
only we love each other now!"

"No, don’t! I don’t like to hear you say that. I want you to care, as I
do. I want you to be fine and--high-minded."

"Eddie, I’m not. There’s no use pretending that I am."

"I don’t want you to pretend to be. I want you to try to be."

"I will!"

He was silent for a time.

"Now, then!" he said. "It won’t do to keep them all waiting any longer.
Are you quite ready?"

"Do you mean for us to get married just the same?"

"Of course!" he said. "I couldn’t be such a prig. I’ve simply got to
forget what you’ve told me, and thank Heaven that I’ve got you after
all. You might have married the fellow!"

He was his own kind self again, but she could see that his great pride
in her, his great joy, were gone.

"Come!" he said again. "We shall be very late."

But she prevented him from leaving. She caught him by the arm and stood
before him, looking up into his face.

"Eddie!" she cried, with a gasp that seemed to tear her heart out. "I’ve
_got_ to! I can’t deceive you. Oh, _God_! It’s so awful!"

He didn’t move or speak.

"Eddie," she said, "it _was_ that!"

"Ah, it was!" he said, in a tone of polite surprise.

"I had a baby."

A shudder ran through him, and he closed his eyes in mortal pain.

"You can’t ever know what I suffered! Oh, Eddie, Eddie, I’ve been
punished enough for what I did! And the poor little baby----”

"Never mind!" he said, in a voice so low that she could hardly hear him.
"Don’t tell me any more. I don’t want to know." He undid her fingers
from his arm. "I want to get away," he said. "Good-by!"

But she stopped him again.

"And the man was _Vincent_!" she screamed. "Now! Now! _Now_ you know!"




CHAPTER FIFTEEN


The next morning, just at the usual hour, Angelica entered the back
parlour, where Sillon and Devery were working side by side. They both
looked up in a sort of stern surprise, and waited for her to speak
first.

She stood before them, a quivering smile on her lips. She seemed on the
verge of tears; but after a silent moment she raised her eyes to look at
them with a sublime and touching bravery.

"Can I come back?" she asked.

They were both speechless.

"I don’t want to explain," she said, in a trembling voice. "Not ever!
But if I can come back, I’ll--go on--just the same."

Miss Sillon got up.

"Certainly!" she said pleasantly. "If you like, we’ll go on--in the old
way. We’ll forget all this. Don’t you think so, Devery?"

"Of course!" said Devery.

But no matter how they tried, their cordiality was strained, their looks
averted. They knew, all three of them, that it would be a long time
before this thing could be forgotten. Half of the letters of "Angélique"
had gone from the windows--and how much more had gone as well?

But at least their friendship endured. They neither questioned her nor
blamed her; they simply took her back, as whole-heartedly as was
possible to them. Whatever incredible and discreditable occurrence may
have interrupted that dazzling wedding, they would not repudiate her.

She went to her cupboard, took out the box in which she had kept her
odds and ends, and, sitting down at her old table, spread out the
glittering, gay scraps before her.

"I’m going to stick to business now!" she said, with a sob.


                                THE END

                   *       *       *       *       *

       Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

             and sutble brain=> and subtle brain {pg 210}

   She was years younger that=> She was years younger than {pg 279}
   
       her great good-wall=>  her great good-will {pg 128}
	   
	 like to disconcert with a long=> liked to disconcert with a long {pg 23}

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANGELICA ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
